2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

THIS YEAR REQUIRES FOCUS
In August 2017, a rare explosive event known
as GW17817 took place in space. Two stars
collided, unleashing a blast energetic enough
to form an incalculable number of new stellar
bits that continue to travel through interstellar
space. Over time, this stardust will combine into
small objects, evolve into large rocks, fuse with
even more material, and form into planets. One
incredibly violent disruption will someday lead
to the formation of a new corner of the universe.
This is how our own sun and Earth, and all of
human existence, came into being.
Lately it’s as if we’ve been living through the
aftermath of cataclysmic explosions: the
release of generative artificial intelligence
systems like ChatGPT and Midjourney, a fusion
breakthrough that could someday generate
zero-carbon energy, Russia’s ongoing invasion
into Ukraine, deep uncertainty about a global
recession, and AlphaFold’s protein-folding algorithms that predicted structures for nearly all
cataloged proteins known to science, to name
a few. These and other forces of change are
colliding, going supernovae, and resulting in an
unfathomable amount of new signals—bits of
change that, over time, result in the trends that
shape society.

2

Now more than ever, it’s important to carefully
track new trends as they emerge. But that isn’t
easy, given the rapid pace of change. For that
reason, the theme of our 2023 Tech Trends report
is Focus. It is crucial to focus when new signals
are forming because some may be lasting and
develop into impactful trends, while others might
burn out and fade away. In an increasingly complex and fast-paced world, leaders who focus
on the trends that matter and adapt to changing
circumstances make better decisions and see
improved outcomes. Trends enable them to anticipate near-term change, understand the factors
influencing their industries, and develop a point of
view on the future.
Our research is presented in 14 in-depth reports
that reveal the current state of play, a list of influencers to watch, key trends, detailed examples,
expert perspectives and recommendations designed to help executives and their teams develop their strategic positioning. Some of the trends
are new advancements on mature technologies,
while others represent frontier technologies and
areas of science. When we look at them collectively, new centers of gravity come into focus, and
we can glimpse the impacts they will have on
every sector.

Trends on their own cannot predict the future.
Rather, future-focused organizations use them to
deeply reflect on the tension between long-term
and short-term goals and to reduce uncertainty.
By understanding the trends and changes shaping the landscape, executives can make informed
decisions and capitalize on new opportunities in
the year ahead.
We invite you to join us in observing how the stardust settles into new signals and trends.
Share your feedback with us at
2023trends@futuretodayinstitute.com.

Amy Webb
Chief Executive Officer
Future Today Institute

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

IMPACT OF TRENDS ON YOUR INDUSTRY
AI

Generative AI

Climate and
Green Tech

Mobility

Near-Term Relevance

AR/ VR/ XR and
Synthetic Media

Robots and
Drones

Web3
Infrastructure

Long-Term Relevance
Bioengineering

Metaverse

Quantum

Agriculture
Automotive
Aviation and Travel
Construction, Engineering
Consumer Packaged Goods
Education
Financial Services
Government and Policy
Health Care Systems and Services
Hospitality
Media (Entertainment)
Media (News)
Pharmaceutical and Medical Products
Public and Social Sectors
Real Estate
Restaurants
Retail
Space and Aerospace Defense
Supply Chain and Logistics

Telecommunications

3

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Artificial Intelligence

AI TRENDS SUMMARY
AI is a force
multiplier on
technological
progress because
it is an enabler of
other technologies
and powers
the evolution
of business,
government, and
society.

Key Insights for 2023
We have entered the “text-to-everything” era.
Soon, we will use natural language to operate
and interact with computers rather than graphic
user interfaces (GUIs).
We expect to see increased activity in the
specialized AI accelerators space this year.
Watch the UK’s Graphcore, which built a new
type of processor for machine intelligence to
accelerate machine learning and AI applications,
and Cerebras, which built one of the fastest AI
accelerators based on the largest processor in
the industry, as well as AWS Inferentia accelerators. Will Nvidia’s GPU/AI accelerator moat get
disrupted this year?
It’s possible for agents to learn the right skills
but the wrong objectives; an AI system can
be asked to learn something that then could
be used for harmful purposes. Commercial AI
products could inadvertently incentivize bad
behavior.
GENERATIVE AI

If the 2010s were known for perception AI—systems that sensed signals such as images and
text—to understand the world around us, the

5

2020s will be known for generative AI. These
systems not only sense and understand the
world but can also generate new content, concepts, and ideas while communicating with us.
AI is emerging as an assistant for all knowledge
workers. Within the next 18-24 months, we will
see assistive technology developed for a variety
of professions. Think: GitHub’s Copilot for financial analysts, commercial real estate developers,
and lawyers.
In the next 18-24 months, generative AI will
be incorporated into consumer applications.
Already, Canva, the popular online graphic
design tool, has integrated Stable Diffusion in its
platform. Microsoft has incorporated OpenAI’s
DALL-E 2 image-generating system into its Microsoft Designer and Image Creator applications,
which is a big upgrade to clip art. Google’s Bard
includes an API to encourage developers to
start building new products. Notion, the freemium productivity and note-taking web application, uses LLMs for assistive writing.
General-purpose models will be commoditized
in the near-future. This will lead to large language model (LLM) features being integrated
into every app. The first players to succeed in
the space will likely be creative apps, and all of
them will have LLMs as a backbone to inspire

and augment human creativity.
Vertically integrated solutions will garner a
higher transactional value. Some companies
will win by providing “a refined/value-added
LLM product” to the end consumer and meeting
the customer in desired distribution channels,
such as LLMs for health care, legal, finance, and
architecture.
In the next 12-18 months, watch for the proliferation of large-scale open-source models and
tools including Stable Diffusion and HuggingFace.
Publicly available LLMs are often the foundation for AI startups, but some researchers and
technologists are questioning their defensibility
when it comes to capturing value. The moat is
in data. Techniques and models will largely get
commoditized, and served via the infrastructure
layer, where real value will be realized.
Long-term sustainability depends on network
effects to gather enough user data. User-generated data can be harnessed to differentiate
systems by offering tuned models on top of
foundational/commoditized LLMs, creating a
flywheel effect. Longer term, we expect to see
niche LLMs owned by a select few players, while
general-purpose LLMs become commoditized.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Artificial Intelligence

AI TRENDS SUMMARY
At the infrastructure layer, we anticipate a variety of generative AI services built to better serve
a variety of applications. In addition to OpenAI,
specialized players are entering the market,
including AI21, Cohere, Snorkel.AI, and Scale.AI.
ENTERPRISE

Top talent will start breaking away from the
largest players—Google, OpenAI, Meta—to form
their own startups, which will include conversational agents, artificial general intelligence programs, AI-first biotech companies, and the like.
Consolidation will continue to be a driving
theme in 2023. Here’s just one example: Microsoft plans to increase its investment in and
leverage OpenAI for Bing to pull market share
away from Google search.
Google’s powerful ChatGPT rival, Bard, uses an
AI model called LaMDA. Launched February
2023, could catalyze a new race for conversational search.
We anticipate increased enterprise adoption of
AI. Leaders see AI as necessary for growth in
the current macroeconomic environment, even
as new developments make some job categories obsolete.

6

AUTOMATION

REGULATION AND GEOPOLITICS

AI coding assistants will grow in popularity.
OpenAI’s Codex, introduced in 2021, evolved
from research to open commercialization by
the middle of last year. GitHub CoPilot is now
available as a subscription ($10 per month). As
of January, Amazon’s CodeWhisperer is available
in preview. Internally, Google is using a machine
language–powered code completion tool—it
may at some point be made available to everyday users, possibly this year.

Will this be the year the government breaks up
Big Tech? US lawmakers have begun work to
decouple Google’s ad business from the rest of
the organization. In the European Union, powerful new regulations of tech platforms could go
into effect. In China, regulators have eased up
slightly on Big Tech crackdowns—but the Chinese Communist Party is intent on focusing new
R&D toward servicing the country’s long-term
growth ambitions.

We expect to see AI more deeply integrated
into health care and life sciences later this year.
Generative AI will yield new proteins, antibodies,
and drugs, while biology and chemistry-specific
models will result in faster discovery, further
providing practical use cases and leading to
increased investment.
Could 2023 mark the beginning of the end of
human radiologists? Lithuania-based Oxipit, an
AI-first medical imaging startup, built an autonomous system that reports on chest X-rays that
show no abnormalities. The technology is good
enough that it received state-level certification
to operate independently, without a radiologist
in the loop.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
Artificial intelligence
should be part of
every strategic plan,
as it crosses multiple
dimensions, from
workforce automation,
to digital transformation,
to everyday business
processes and
business intelligence.
It is imperative that
executives and senior
managers understand
what AI is, what it is not,
and what strategic value
it adds to the business.

7

Artificial Intelligence

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
As no-code and low-code applications become more widely available, Future Today
Institute analysis shows that innovation
teams will be in position to build powerful
systems for decision management, business intelligence, and product ideation.
Generative AIs will improve an organization’s efficiency and enhance creativity,
leading to hybrid human-machine creative
teams. AI-assisted design will dramatically
increase the number of prototypes that can
be automatically generated with prompts.
We recommend that chief strategy officers
in every field develop a solid understanding
of AI to engage more closely with others in
the C-suite to develop a cohesive point of
view on digitalization, augmentation and
automation—as well as to develop strategic plans. Importantly, businesses should
keep abreast of emerging regulations that
could restrict the use of consumer data,

algorithms, or generative AI systems. Risk
models should be developed to determine
plausible near-futures, so that leaders can
adjust their strategies accordingly.
When it comes to talent and workforce
development, the need for highly skilled
people is fast outpacing the graduation rate
of universities. This might lead to a shift in
higher education: It’s plausible that companies in search of AI specialists might opt for
modular certifications, which can be earned
faster than traditional four-year degrees.
Talent sourcing and retention will continue
to pose challenges for tech companies—
and for organizations in other industries
that need a trained workforce but may not
be able to provide the same perks as the
hottest AI players.

cies, better tracking, business intelligence,
and assistance with decision-making. As
training costs decline, more applications
will be built. Spending on AI systems and
hardware is likely to explode this decade,
creating significant enterprise value overall.

In nearly every industry, AI will serve as a
force multiplier for growth, bringing efficien-

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Artificial Intelligence

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How do these
trends change
our perspective
on our current AI
investment and
capabilities?

2
Is our organization
positioned to
leverage AI for
growth, in addition
to realizing new
efficiencies?

3
When we engage in
long-term strategic
planning, how does
the evolution of AI
factor in?

4
Are we adequately
preparing our
workforce to
succeed in a
world in which
their knowledge
tasks might be
augmented or fully
automated by AI?

5
What is our process
to vet, verify
and monitor our
vendors?
Is the AI we’re using
explainable?
If not, does that
open us up to
additional risk?

6
Does our team
have an expansive
enough viewpoint
on emerging
threats and attack
surfaces?

7
What parts of our
business make us
vulnerable as AI
evolves?

9
If proposed
antitrust legislation
passes in the US
and the EU further
regulates Big
Tech companies,
how does this
create a strategic
opportunity for our
organization?

8
What is our point
of view on the use
of generative AI
systems?

10
How might we
develop the
knowledge,
experience, and
talent in place to
leverage these AI
trends?

Or, what might our
organization lose?

8

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Web3

WEB3 TRENDS SUMMARY
A trustless and
decentralized web
holds significant
benefits for
consumers and
businesses and will
enable them to
engage seamlessly.

Key Insights for 2023
Security is top of mind for those invested in Web
3.0. Cybersecurity breaches across 2021 and
2022 exposed nascent Web 3.0 systems’ weaknesses, which platforms will need to address to
ensure Web 3.0 is reliable and scalable.
Efforts are emerging to use Web 3.0 capabilities
for public good. From tracking environmental sustainability, to improving access to food,
and archiving items of historical importance,
emerging blockchain solutions go beyond art
exchanges and decentralized currency to try to
solve some of the world’s most pressing problems.
Proof of work consensus mechanisms were the
cornerstone of early blockchain protocols, but
proof of stake is rapidly emerging as the leading consensus tool because of its efficiency,
reduced need for computing power, and less
onerous environmental impact.
Tracking the origin and ownership of items, content, data, and assets continues to be the predominant use of blockchain, but the technology
is expanding beyond its initial focus on NFTs
(non-fungible tokens) to include personal data,
virtual representations of real-world assets, and
other types of data.

10

Health care, food, supply chain, journalism,
and energy are some of the industries that will
see Web 3.0 uses expand and new capabilities
emerge in the coming year.
Digital identity is a key area of development in
the Web 3.0 landscape. For Web 3.0 to function,
individuals will require methods of identification
and ways to validate transactions, but the tools
to do so are still inchoate.
Regulation of Web 3.0 technologies is being developed in a variety of countries. Organizations
that provide or use Web 3.0 capabilities will
need to remain informed about these regulations to ensure they are in compliance.
Web 3.0 is changing the way individuals interact
globally. While governments are mostly shaping
regulations today, large communities are already
beginning to form in Web 3.0 that have a comparable level of economic power. Regulations
that do not take into account the borderless
nature of Web 3.0 may be difficult to apply in
real-world settings.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
Web3 describes a nascent
collection of technologies
that will continue to
develop and mature over
the next several decades.
For many, Web3 feels speculative, and thus
not a candidate for deep investment. However, Web3 technologies and those that
enable it, including artificial intelligence,
advanced network connectivity, and user
applications, are evolving rapidly. Organizations taking steps to prepare will be
positioned to respond as the technology
does scale, by connecting it with their value
propositions and improving their market
offerings.
There are parallel lessons from Web 1.0. The
applications we see today were unimaginable to most at one time, because the
software and hardware had not yet sufficiently advanced. Those organizations that

11

Web3

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
closely tracked its development, however,
and grew with the technology, were well
equipped to pounce when the technology
scaled (think: Amazon or Nintendo).

Businesses are advised to prepare for Web3
as they would for any other transformational
technology:

Over the next five to 10 years, Web3 will enable a growing number of applications for
governmental, corporate, and consumer use
that extend well beyond financial or marketing applications. Nearly every company
and industry has the potential to be revolutionized by Web3 technology. So, leaders
need to think differently about not only how
they deliver their products but also the type
of service and offerings their stakeholders
now value.

Develop a basic understanding of blockchain technology and its history. Create a
point of view for your organization on the
definitions of Web3 and the metaverse, and
the differences between them. Follow a few
key players in the space. Buy some cryptocurrency, even if only for the experience of
having a crypto wallet.

Organizations will need to confront unfamiliar technologies, develop new pipelines
for talent, and align their products to suit
this new paradigm. The majority of organizations will be impacted at the Layer 3 level
as their offerings and distribution channels
become disintermediated by peer-to-peer
capabilities, and stakeholders begin to demand more seamless transactions.

GAIN FAMILIARITY

DEVELOP A POINT OF VIEW

Envision scenarios that reveal plausible future worlds where Web3 technologies have
reached critical mass. Identify the top ways
you could use Web3 technology to enhance
your value proposition.
CREATE YOUR ORGANIZATION’S VISION

Develop a long-term vision to fill key underlying technology gaps to drive investment,
M&A, product development, talent acquisition, and planning decisions.

IDENTIFY AND PRIORITIZE TRENDS

Prioritize trends that sit in the layer your organization must interact with most closely.
EXPLORE WHITE SPACES

Explore white spaces to gain new insights.
Where are the opportunities for innovation
and growth? Where are the threats to the
organization’s ability to thrive? Where are
the downstream risks to partners or customers?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Web3

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
What, if any, layers of
the Web3 ecosystem
do we need to
participate in by
creating or developing
a capability?

12

2
In what ways would
our stakeholders
benefit from
interacting with our
company and each
other more directly?

3
What value do we
have to share with
stakeholders, and
how could it be
tokenized for easier
transactions?

4
What physical assets
does the company
use or distribute
that would benefit
from tokenization
for tracking or
traceability?

5
How might we be
impacted if data is
less available in the
future as consumers
control their data more
tightly?

6
How would an increase
in cryptocurrency
adoption impact our
business model?

7
How might Web3
drive an increase in
globalization within
our industry?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Metaverse

METAVERSE TRENDS SUMMARY
The metaverse - a
collective virtual
shared space may not be fully
developed yet,
but its impact
on industry
and consumer
interactions is
already widely felt.

Key Insights for 2023
Interfaces will become more immersive as both
virtual spaces and the physical world are interlaced with rich digital media experiences.
The metaverse is not a single technology, protocol, or entity; it means many different things to
many different stakeholders. Executives should
get clear about expectations and interests being
brought to the table.
Smart eyewear, in the form of glasses and contacts, will upend industries and interfaces designed for smartphones. New computing interfaces like headsets and glasses will take years
to reach wide user adoption, but web-based
standards already make augmented experiences
possible using today’s smartphones.
AR applications are ripe for consumer adoption
because they solve for real-world convenience
needs like navigation and contextual information, and yet they may be furthest away due to
the technical challenges of heads-up displays,
glasses, and contact lenses.

or transferring attributes of virtual goods and
identity avatars across platforms.
People will create multiple digital versions of
themselves, each tailored for specific purposes.
This will lead to fragmentation—and a widening
gap between who a person is in the physical
world and who they project themselves to be in
various online platforms.
Economic headwinds may have tempered
recent exuberance over new realities, but the
infrastructure work that will pave the path for
future development is underway.
Embodied, spatial presence in virtual worlds
only increases the need for ethical and humane
guardrails for responsible use of technology.
XR technologies pose as many accessibility
challenges as they do opportunities.

Interoperability and standards are still being
worked out, but they are key to making spatial
computing transferable across worlds, whether
it’s about a shared understanding of coordinates

14

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
Now is the time
for focused
experimentation and
learning in the short
term, and imaginative
scenario planning
for the long term,
as industries reckon
with the disruptive
potential of novel
computing interfaces
that will succeed the
internet-enabled
smartphone.

15

Metaverse

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
STRATEGY

New reality technologies are still very
nascent, so it’s worth thinking in both the
near term and longer term when setting
goals and priorities. From infrastructure, to
hardware, to software—everything about
immersive and spatial technologies is in development and up for grabs. Strategic plans
should include provisions for interoperability, data portability, and transparency.
INNOVATION

As digital and physical realities become
intertwined, innovation teams in many
industries have an opportunity to pursue
new moonshots. In 5 to 10 years, if consumers are wearing heads-up displays in the
form of glasses or contacts, how could a
retail, QSR/fast casual dining, or fan experience look radically different? How does
this affect the medical patient’s experience?
How might connected eyewear integrate
with a car or truck? In what ways could

a digital twin be additive to real estate,
insurance, and city planning? Developing
sound moonshot ideas and the applications
to match will enable companies to positively contribute to new realities and the
metaverse even as emerging platforms are
being built.
R&D

Come to virtual and augmented layers of
the world with a curious explorer’s mindset.
Experimentation is the name of the game
at this stage, so think bold, imagine what’s
possible, and be ready to learn from early endeavors. Brands should be a part of
the emerging ecosystem, at the very least
to learn how consumers behave, interact,
shop, discover, and create. Beyond gamified
experiences, innovation teams should work
toward co-creating digital worlds alongside consumers and technology partners
to champion inclusivity and sound ethical
practices.

GROWTH

After the short-term hiccups of the current
economic climate, Future Today Institute
anticipates sustained growth for new realities tech and the metaverse ecosystem
over the long term. Austerity will only refine
efforts in the technologies’ development
and filter out the hype. Brands may be more
risk-averse in their willingness to experiment in uncertain economic conditions,
but the foundations for the spatial frontier
of the internet will continue apace. Use this
time to imagine longer-term scenarios and
effects on your industry, and consider disruptive risks and opportunities.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Metaverse

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
Where might the
new realities aid
or disrupt our
industry and/or our
business’s value
chain?

2
What affective
state or emotions
are we hoping to
evoke for customers
in immersive
environments?
Care, ease, delight,
empathy, wonder?

16

3
What is our
customers’
demonstrated
appetite for
immersive media
experiences?
What, if any,
assumptions are we
making about our
user base?

4
What happens
to our customer
relationships if
the smartphone
interface
disappears?

5
How can brands
ensure that new
realities and
metaverse spaces
are inclusive?

6
How will we
incorporate
input and iterate
with customer
feedback?

7
How do these new
realities efforts
serve and align with
our brand values?

8
What does success
in the metaverse
look like for us
today?
In 10 years?

What voices are
represented at the
table? Who are
we overlooking or
missing?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Metaverse

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
9
What buy-in and
support do we
have for taking
experimental risks
with emerging
technologies?
What is our risk
appetite for
investing in pilots
and exploring new
business?

10
How dependent
upon a proprietary
platform is this
effort, and what
are the risks
associated with
that dependence?
What requirements
would we have
if we prioritized
interoperability and
decentralization?

11
What ecosystem
partners, platforms,
and communities
are we working with
to leverage domain
expertise?

12
What other
intersecting
trends and forces
could affect our
efforts—climate
change, quantum
computing,
chip shortages,
geopolitical unrest,
novel pandemics?

If digital identities
aren’t interoperable
across platforms,
what problems
might that create
for our business?

17

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Bioengineering

BIOENGINEERING TRENDS SUMMARY
Breakthroughs in
bioengineering
mean incredible
opportunity for
every industry,
but could also
pose new risks as
the technology is
developed and
implemented.

Key Insights for 2023
Bioengineering is a modern “general purpose
technology” that has the potential to influence
entire economies and to alter society through
political, economic, and social structures.
Innovations in biotechnology are currently defined by five key areas: biomolecules, biosystems, biomaterials, biocomputing, and biomachine
interfaces. Major breakthroughs in one field
either reinforce or accelerate breakthroughs in
the others.
Based on viable technologies and use cases that
exist today, estimates of the combined total economic impact of bioengineering range from $2
trillion to $4 trillion per year beginning in 2030.

Advancements will result in optionality for carbon capture, plastics recycling, and biodiversity
improvement.
Ethical concerns around genetic engineering
have yet to be resolved; this could prove to be
a challenge as new techniques, such as genetic
surgery, become available to the public.
There is no singular global framework governing
bioengineering. As a result, we can anticipate
geopolitical conflict stemming from the development and use of emerging bio-based technologies in the years to come.

Emerging trends in synthetic biology, CRISPR,
artificial intelligence, and engineering will result
in new opportunities for health care, pharmaceuticals, agriculture, food and beverage,
beauty, chemicals, sustainability, energy, and
materials production industries.
Disruptions to conventional meat and dairy production, textile manufacturing, and pharmaceutical development are on the near-term horizon.

19

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE

Bioengineering

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?

Bioengineering is a long-horizon collection of technologies that will
continue to develop and mature over the next several decades. It
may feel premature to take action today; however, advancements
in this field will have a compounding effect. AI offers a useful
analogy here: The entire field of AI developed largely unnoticed
by the business community, until suddenly it seemed to be both
ubiquitous and a necessary part of daily operations. Leaders who
were tracking AI developments and had developed a point of view
wound up with valuable first-mover advantages.
In the coming decade, bioengineering technologies will force
leaders to confront their cherished beliefs about their core
products and services, and they will challenge existing business
models. Leaders will need to seek out new partnerships, develop
new pipelines for talent, and align stakeholders on the moral and
ethical uses of engineered biology.

FAMILIARITY

REHEARSE THE FUTURES

Get to know the science, history, ecosystem, and players. Read books on synthetic
biology and CRISPR. Cultivate relationships
with experts. Attend a few conferences, just
to learn. Follow VC funding and learn about
their startups.

Generate scenarios that reveal plausible
future worlds where bioengineering technologies have reached critical mass. Where
can the organization play and win? What
challenges can be identified up front?

TRENDS

Develop a long-term vision on bioengineering technologies to drive investment, M&A,
product development, talent acquisition,
and planning decisions.

Prioritize the trends that are most critical
to the organization in the near term, and
project the likely business impact.

VISION

WHITE SPACES

Explore white spaces to gain new insights.
Where are there opportunities for innovation and growth? What might threaten
the organization’s ability to thrive? Where
are there downstream risks to partners or
customers?

We advise businesses to prepare for the bioengineering age as
they would for any other transformational technology:

20

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Bioengineering

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
Are we adequately
prepared for the
bioengineering era?

2
In what ways will
bioengineering
influence our
manufacturing
process?
Our supply chains?
Our product lines?

21

3
How could
we leverage
bioengineering
to give us a
competitive
advantage over our
competitors?

4

5

How could
bioengineering
affect our business
model in the next 2
years?

What new
opportunity spaces
can bioengineering
unlock for our
business?

5 years?

Where does this
open a new market?

If our typical
product
development cycle
takes 5-10 years,
what do we need
to do differently
starting today?

6
How could
bioengineering
make our company
vulnerable?
Does this change
our perspective on
risk?

7
Do we have the
knowledge,
experience, and
talent in place?

8
What will it take
to socialize the
opportunities
and risks of
bioengineering
inside our
organization?
How can we
create a sense of
urgency among our
stakeholders?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Climate & Energy

CLIMATE, GREEN TECH AND ENERGY TRENDS SUMMARY
While challenges
stand in the way
of addressing
climate change,
tech advancements
have stoked
hope for the
development of a
sustainable future.

Key Insights for 2023
ENERGY PRODUCTION

Next-generation solar cells are thin, flexible,
and printable, and they expand the spectrum
of wavelengths from which they can extract
energy, dramatically growing the application
opportunities for the technology.
Wind is moving offshore. New types of turbines—vertical or bladeless, for example—might
provide more efficient alternatives to horizontal
ones, or can be used side by side to catch winds
at different altitudes.
Startups aim to tap into geothermal energy
20 kilometers beneath the earth’s surface. If
successful and scalable, this could provide the
majority of energy needed in the world.
Hydrogen can now be made from sewer gas
(hydrogen sulfide) using nothing but visible
light, making the production much more affordable.
Biofuels from hemp and algae could be more efficient to produce than from traditional biomass,
bringing down the fuel’s price and making it
more likely that governments implement blend-

23

ing requirements.
Former landfills and mining sites can be repurposed for renewable energy development. They
often have existing infrastructure and permitting
advantages compared to other swaths of real
estate.
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s
National Ignition Facility produced a nuclear
fusion reaction that resulted in a net energy
gain. Decades in the making, the breakthrough
potentially paves the way for emissions-free
energy—though realistically that won’t happen
for decades more. Many challenges remain,
including devising the supporting infrastructure
and storage for fusion energy.
New methods of harvesting energy can supplement or replace more traditional carbon-emitting energy sources. Waves, tides, and currents
in bodies of water could provide more reliable
sources of energy than wind or solar. Even
sweat can provide a way to power small electronics and medical devices, producing no toxic
byproducts.
Rare earths can be found in mining waste,
opening the door to diversifying the world’s supply. China currently controls 80% of the global
market in rare earths.

ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

The costs associated with renewable energy
have decreased significantly, but other barriers
still limit the scale of these energy sources.
More efficient and faster-charging batteries
and novel methods of energy storage at the
grid level are leading the way to affordable,
environmentally friendly, lasting, flexible, and
scalable solutions.
New technologies are making it possible to
move and harvest energy in groundbreaking
ways. Ultra-high-voltage power lines, power-beaming microwaves, and space-based
solar power are among the solutions that will
allow energy to be transferred to undersupplied
regions or moved to areas experiencing energy
shortages.
Grids are becoming more resilient and dynamic.
This will be of supreme importance as more intense storms and forest fires increase as climate
change worsens.
EMISSIONS REMOVAL

Volcanic sand and genetically edited crops
could be significant natural carbon capture
and storage (CCS) opportunities, in addition

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Climate & Energy

CLIMATE, GREEN TECH AND ENERGY TRENDS SUMMARY
to expensive mechanical CCS installations at
plants.

accuracy and profitability and thereby increase
opportunities to bring new life to old products.

Companies are developing ways to use carbon
dioxide captured from smokestacks or simply
the air. A suite of new products ranging from
fashion accessories to imitation meat can be
made from the captured gas. The most viable
products will combat environmental challenges by not only taking excess carbon out of the
atmosphere, but also minimizing processes that
emit extra carbon dioxide.

New materials are radically changing the built
environment and bringing new life to the construction industry. A suite of biomaterials and
advanced materials science will reduce carbon
emissions and even result in carbon being
stored within these new materials.

Tracking technologies are enabling both consumers and manufacturers to take control of
their carbon footprints. Companies can develop
competitive advantages by being more transparent with their value chains, appealing to
environmentally conscious consumers.
EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS

Carbon-neutral or carbon-negative cement, 3D
printing and AI-aided project planning, and the
use of alternative materials such as recycled
plastic all have the potential to significantly
reduce the construction sector’s emissions.
By using computer vision to better identify
materials, recycling programs can boost their

24

Consumer and industrial products are being
equipped with solar and electric capabilities to
reduce carbon emissions and provide reliable
solutions for unstable energy grids. They are
also being equipped with capabilities for reducing microplastics in the ocean.
The transportation sector is minimizing emissions through a series of innovations that improve vehicle aerodynamics, optimize charging,
and even enable vehicles to be charged while
moving. These innovations will be necessary for
a critical mass of users to adopt electric alternatives.
Behavioral changes such as shifting to plantbased diets or using renewable energy for heating, cooling, and cooking will have measurable
effects on reducing carbon emissions.

ENVIRONMENTAL MANIPULATION

Rewilding projects are growing and are getting
a lot of public support, as healthy and balanced
ecosystems also help combat climate change.
Cloud manipulation—brightening or seeding—might help reduce Earth’s temperature or
increase the amount of rain. Overall implications
to the world’s ecosystem are not clear.
The oceans could be our best bet for removing
CO2 from the air, if humans “help” them by, for
example, adjusting their alkalinity or encouraging the growth of phytoplankton. However, the
effects of these experiments on the wider maritime ecosystem have not been explored.
EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

Using AI, satellites, and drones to monitor the
effects of climate change reveals data and
new discoveries that otherwise would remain
unknowable.
New types of city projects have garnered attention as climate change forces humanity to rethink where and how we live. Examples include
domed, floating, and underground cities—all of
which completely upend life as we know it.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
OPPORTUNITIES
Interim Solutions
It takes time—decades—to implement green
processes and methods such as carbon capture and storage technologies or infrastructure
upgrades to accommodate renewable energies
and distributed grids. Long interim periods
come with their own specific subsets of pain
points. Are there developments in your industry
that would benefit from products that address
these transient states?
The Energy Opportunity
The energy sector is experiencing a shift in the
power dynamics of stakeholders as customers
demand and search for environmentally friendly
products and services. Decentralization of the
grid and non-dispatchable energy sources such
as wind and solar are not only introducing new
players to the energy market, but demands on
the grid itself are fundamentally changing to
accommodate frequent energy transformations
and changes in energy direction. How can your
company rethink energy, be it as a possible
additional product or an alternative form of
production?

25

Climate & Energy

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
Environmental Justice
Discussion about wealthy countries paying reparations to smaller, poorer countries that are disproportionately affected by climate change has
gained momentum. Wealthy nations pledged
payments during the COP27 last year. How can
your company go beyond introducing green
practices and help alleviate the damage done?
Go Local
By reconfiguring supply chains, manufacturers
can source materials closer to production lines,
minimizing the need to transport goods and
products over long distances. Through innovations such as using repurposed carbon to make
products, organizations can have more control
over where products are made, allowing them to
incorporate more instances of near shoring.
Get Ahead of Regulation
As more emphasis continues to be placed on
ESG, the onus will be on organizations to provide transparency into their inner workings and
environmental impacts. It will behoove organizations to get ahead of these new expectations.
Aside from the adoption of more stringent ESGs
from shareholders and investors, swift regulatory
changes will catch many organizations off guard
and have significant bottom-line ramifications.

THREATS
Cybersecurity
Technology enables and facilitates the shift to
environmentally friendly processes in many of
our most important industries—energy, food,
industrial processes. However, this also makes
those industries vulnerable to cyberattacks. As
you upgrade your company’s digital infrastructure, are you making sure that your systems are
adequately protected? And how are you preparing for outages caused by cyberattacks?
Unexpected Impacts
Disrupted supply chains have caused balloon
flights from the National Weather Service’s
Storm Prediction Center to be canceled, reducing data collection and compromising forecasts.
The number of cities across Europe declaring
clean air zones is expected to rise exponentially by 2025, forcing polluting vehicles off the
road and possibly affecting last-mile delivery.
Most leaders are aware of the direct impacts of
climate change and environmental regulations
on their businesses—shortages of raw materials, for instance, or a fragile supply chain. But
are you aware of the second- and third-order
impacts on your business of shifts in consumer
behavior and an evolving regulatory landscape?

A Shortage of Qualified Workers
Although many tech workers have left the industry to find climate-related roles, the world will
still face a dearth of talent dedicated to ensuring
a climate-resilient future. Roles will become
increasingly specialized, as the need for new
technologies will also create the need for careful
operation and maintenance. Universities can be
slow to adjust to such changes, so climate-conscious organizations will have to source and
train much of the available talent on their own.
Planning for Climate Migration
Climate migration will become an existential
threat sooner and to a greater degree than many
are anticipating. As climate migration increases,
businesses will have to adjust their operations,
supply chains, and skilled talent. Many will face
decisions to uphold human rights and equality.
The End of Greenwashing
Are you prepared for complete transparency?
As the ability to track CO2 emissions increases
and industries can account for and track emissions throughout the entire value chain and lifecycle of a product, it will be easy to determine
who greenwashes and who is implementing
truly environmentally friendly practices.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Climate & Energy

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
Are we aware of
how climate change
will affect our entire
value chain?
Considering our
location, supply
chain, and the cost
of raw materials,
how will our
customers be
affected?

2
Can we produce our
own energy, and
potentially even sell
surplus energy to
third parties?

3
How can we and/or
our vendors become
part of the circular
economy?

4
Will our products
or services still
be relevant in
a world that is
moving toward
environmentally
friendly processes
and a lifestyle
suited to a new
climate reality?

5
Does my team or
department need
new skill sets to
optimally address
climate or energy
questions?

6
Do we know our
complete CO2
footprint, and
are we prepared
for stricter
environmental
regulations?

7
Can we capture the
CO2 we emit? And
what would it take
to enter the CO2
market?

8
How should we
prepare for more
frequent and more
severe extreme
weather events?

9
What alternative
materials are
we prepared to
integrate into our
built environment
or our products
to create more
sustainable
behaviors?

26

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

ROBOTS, DRONES AND MOBILITY TRENDS SUMMARY
While challenges
stand in the way
of addressing
climate change,
tech advancements
have stoked
hope for the
development of a
sustainable future.

Key Insights for 2023
As these mobility, robotics and drone markets
mature, they are tackling three key areas of
transformation:
Electrification: Mobility is making substantive
shifts to battery-powered vehicles, while robotics and drones remain committed to an electric
future.
Automation: Mobility is seeing growth in automated safety features, while the capabilities and
use of drones and robots to automate specific
tasks and jobs continue to rise.
Autonomy: All three markets are looking to impart more autonomy on their machines, allowing
them to become more effective. More autonomous operations would help the three markets
in their quest to solve the last mile delivery
problem.
ELECTRIFICATION

Companies are reimagining the interior of
vehicles to improve the driver and passenger
experience, creating a third personal space for
consumers, outside their homes and workplaces. EVs afford designers an open and blank

28

space to work with. Entertainment is a focus,
but improved connectivity and comfort are
also factors, especially for companies looking
to develop interiors for when fully autonomous
driving emerges and passengers can work, play,
or relax in the vehicle. Reimagining how vehicles are used is encouraging non-automotive
companies to capitalize on the growing market,
and create a deeper connection between home
and car.

mandates, as well as consumer expectations of
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG)
goals. These regulations may push other industries to adapt and adjacent industries, such as
warehousing and wholesaling, may see price increases as supply chains pass along new costs.

Bidirectional charging will open up new markets
and other uses for electric vehicles. EVs can
now power job sites or venues, supply emergency power, and serve as a backup to the grid. One
day, these vehicles could augment the broader
electrical grid or allow more homes to operate
off-grid.

Drastic shifts in how engines are powered and
designed will shift the risk characteristics of the
mobility industry, as well as the manufacturers
of these components. These shifts may require
a re-examination of underwriting standards by
insurance carriers. Another consequence will
likely be a shortage of qualified vehicle maintenance professionals. As more automakers adopt
direct-to-consumer car sales, dealerships are
facing a very different future and their maintenance departments may disappear.

EVs prices have already begun to drop, fueled
by tax credits and companies lowering prices
to entice consumers. Battery prices are also
expected to fall over the next five years as economies of scale take shape, new materials and
methodologies become viable, and recycling
becomes more prominent.

Vehicle expenses and insurance costs are likely
to increase as additional entertainment options
are added to vehicles. Customers will also be
exposed to a growing number of new business
models like subscription services that lock factory-installed features behind a paywall, or more
instances of à la carte feature selection.

Legislation phasing out internal combustion
engines has been enacted across the European Union, Canada, and a handful of US states.
Businesses will be forced to respond to these

The market is moving toward consensus on the
future of the EV market. Standardization of charger types and connections, charging locations
and access, and charging costs are coming into

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

ROBOTS, DRONES AND MOBILITY TRENDS SUMMARY
focus, but more legislation and regulations are
needed to bring the industry down a single path,
rather than continuing to branch into numerous
business models.
Hydrogen fuel is without question an excellent
green alternative, but adoption rates for this
technology are still unclear. For construction
or industrial operations out of reach of existing grids, hydrogen may present a cheaper
alternative than installing longer-term solar or
wind. Military operations may seek hydrogen
fuel solutions if they are interested in lessening
their carbon impact. However, it is likely that
fossil fuel availability and the lack of needing to
change vehicle architecture will inhibit extensive
growth here.
AUTOMATION

Ultimately, automation will reduce risks in the
workplace and on roads since most accidents
are caused by human error. Businesses should
be looking at increasing automation in their
operations to reduce the risks of accidents and
injuries.
Robots and drones are here to stay and they will
impact employment opportunities for workers.
At this point, a lack of capital investment is
slowing widespread adoption, as well as the re-

29

luctance to remove humans from the workplace.
A large number of jobs can be automated, and
labor market shortages are compelling businesses to increase robot adoption. Machines do
not ask for a raise, take time off, or need health
benefits. However, machines need a technically
trained workforce to maintain them and repair
them when they break down.
A rise in automation also means that governments, labor or trade unions and organizations,
academic institutions, and nonprofits need to
begin preparing for and anticipating the wave
of shifting employment needs. Former human
employees will need financial support. Students
will need to learn new skills and many former
workers may be forced back into school. Just
as there are now ongoing discussions of how
academia needs to adjust to the release of
ChatGPT, there should be a re-examination of
worker training for the automation age.
AUTONOMY

Autonomous vehicles, robots and drones produce an immense amount of data, and most
companies are not capturing enough of this valuable information. Insights gleaned from this data
could drive efficiencies across operations, or be
sold to interested parties from other industries.

Compared to the steady adoption of EVs, the
autonomous vehicle market is still uncertain.
While a few key players are emerging, regulation is still muddled and inconsistent, though
new rounds of lawsuits and investigations may
resolve some outstanding issues. However, in
order for autonomous vehicles to scale, it will
require cooperation across a complex spectrum
of participants, including regulators (both state
and national), technology developers, consumers, and those responsible for building the
infrastructure. A task that will be challenging
and time consuming.
Developing solutions to the last mile delivery
problem are of paramount importance. Transportation companies, robotics makers, and
drone producers are seeking ways to accomplish this with little or no human intervention. If
companies can develop drones that more viably
transport heavier packages with drones, this
may truly enable the elimination of some last
mile deliveries that need to be completed with a
vehicle or person. This could even expand to industrial operations, allowing companies to move
heavy materials around without fixed machinery
or large vehicles. Construction companies could
move materials between job sites, and industrial firms could move products across different
stages of production.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
Despite some of the headwinds against mobility, robotics, and drones, the major breakthroughs that these markets promise feel like
they are more of a matter of when versus if.
Electrification will take hold over the next 10
years, with autonomy not far behind. Substantial automation will be driven by the widespread
adoption of robots and drones with their autonomous capabilities growing daily. With these
changes coming, organizations should have
plans in place to take advantage of or defend
against the coming changes. Impacts are coming for all businesses regardless of their direct
or tangential connection to mobility or machinery. Most companies should prepare for:
• Capturing and operationalizing data from
vehicles, robots, and drones.
• Finding opportunities to enable automation in
their operations.
• Knowing how insurance will be meaningfully
impacted by automation.
• Understanding how mobile spaces are and
could be used differently.
• Learning the impacts of electrification.

30

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
All businesses and governments need to absorb
increasing volumes of data, as well as capabilities to analyze and utilize the data.

There are opportunities to capture revenues
from the data generated by a fleet, robots, or
drones. This information can assess the health
and efficiency of an operation, suggesting corrections to save on the bottom line, but also to
mine insights and sell this information to other
companies. Would an insurance carrier like
to know how robots are performing and how
frequently they are down? Would they like to
know how accident rates have fallen? Would a
government or department of transportation like
to know what their roads look like? Are vehicle
routes efficiently mapped and planned? If your
company has the ability to answer these types
of questions, you should be questioning how
quickly you can use it.

Labor shortages present challenges, and robots
and drones offer solutions.
Drones and robots can take over repetitive,
dirty, and dangerous jobs, allowing the workforce to focus on more complicated tasks,
keeping them happy and safe. Pulling people
out of these jobs will dramatically lower insurance costs. Employees who sit in an office have
a lower insurance cost for a reason—they are
substantially less likely to get hurt and need
care or rehabilitation.
Automation will meaningfully impact liability,
workers’ compensation, and property premiums
and risks.

Manufacturing, warehousing, delivery, and
labor-intensive businesses need to reevaluate
operations to find opportunities for automation.

Insurance companies should determine how
to promote automation. Increased automation
could meaningfully impact liability and workers’
compensation market premium opportunities as
fewer employees are placed in more dangerous
positions. Installing more machinery may offset
those changes by raising property risks.

Companies should identify opportunities where
robots or drones fit their operations. Some
workers will be replaced, and others will need to
be trained to work alongside the new machines.

Businesses should weigh the change in expense
structures that will come with automation.
Companies will more than likely see a savings
on premiums and insurers will save on claims

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
payouts. It is far more advantageous for a business and an insurance carrier to know exactly
what the probable maximum loss is. A machine
offers that luxury, as people are unpredictable
and fragile.
Automakers, retailers, software, and entertainment businesses should explore how workers
and consumers will expect to use mobile spaces
differently.

With dramatic shifts to vehicle architecture
underway, how people use their cars needs to
be rethought. Will a car become a third space,
between home and work? An EV could some
day become a remote workspace. The van
life concept—living in a vehicle, always on the
move—spread during the pandemic, and new
technologies may encourage a new wave of
nomadism that utilizes modern, digital comforts.
Will this change where people live? How will
this impact the workforce? Employers must be
prepared for a staff that demands remote work
options.

31

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
Businesses, governments and municipalities will
need to incorporate electrification and infrastructure investment into their long-term (5-10
years) strategic plans.

Businesses will need to plan for the transition to
EVs. Hard questions will need to be asked and
an organization will need to decide how quickly it will make the switch. ESG considerations
should not be ignored, especially as consumers
make the switch. They will likely demand the
same, if not more of the businesses they buy
from.
Governments of all localities and sizes need to
begin planning for a different-looking environment that their constituents will work, reside,
and play in. Fundamental changes are coming
to how roads, offices, shops, and homes are
constructed—all centered around charging the
incoming wave of EVs.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
If our company
wants to take
advantage of the
new push for market
share in the modern
vehicle interior,
are we delivering a
product or service
of lasting value
that is transferable
between vehicle
types (ICE, EV,
semi-autonomous,
autonomous)?
Can our product
or service survive
decades of
significant, ongoing
change?

32

2
How can
we leverage
bidirectional
charging and
other new uses for
electric vehicles?

3
Are we collecting
data from vehicles,
operations, people,
and machinery?
If not, what would it
take for us to do so?
How could we
leverage that
data to make our
business better?

4
Are we prepared
for the next chip
shortage or some
other failure within
the supply chain?

5
Are we prepared
for changes in our
workforce?
How will shifts in
birth rates, changes
in educational
attainment, job
satisfaction, and
monetary needs
change who we hire
and what skills we
look for?

Who else would be
interested in our
data?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Mobility, Robotics & Drones

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
6
Can we leverage
robots and drones
to eliminate dull,
dirty, or dangerous
jobs in our
operations?

7
What would our
business look
like with half the
number of human
staff?
How would
it function
differently?
How would we feel
about making this
change?

33

8
Can we
accommodate the
implementation of
a new robot/drone
as seamlessly as we
could hire and train
someone?
Do we have
the space and
knowledge to do
so?

9
For insurance
carriers weighing
the loss of workers’
compensation
premiums to
automation—would
we rather pay to fix
a broken machine
or a broken person?

10
Can we offer our
robots or drones as
a service to others?
What if they were
autonomous?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Computing

COMPUTING, NETWORKING AND QUANTUM TRENDS SUMMARY
Incredible
computing
achievements over
the past several
decades have
paved the way
for the creation of
new computing
architecture and
applications.

35

Key Insights for 2023
Regions slow to adopt 5G will get left behind in
multiple sectors.
6G is the sixth generation of wide-area wireless technology, and is already in development.
Unlike 5G, 6G does not require an entirely new
infrastructure. It builds upon the infrastructure
that’s being put in place for 5G. This means that
when 6G is available, adoption will be quick.
The metaverse will not happen without significant advances and implementation of computing and connectivity technologies, among
them 5G, middle-mile fiber networks, and high
resolution video technology.
Satellite internet will squeeze margins of other
communication service providers and render
them less relevant.

Organic computers may help us overcome
Moore’s law since they can store more information than a transistor and do so with less energy.
Quantum computers will be able to break into
any conventionally encrypted computer. To keep
data and secrets secure, governments and companies must act now to implement post-quantum cryptography.
Computationally intensive processes are ideal
candidates for quantum applications. By utilizing quantum to perform Monte Carlo methods,
researchers can include more random values in
the simulation—thus improving accuracy—without compromising speed. And quantum computers are ideally suited for simulating molecule
behaviors, thereby drastically speeding pharmaceutical drug discovery and development.

The semiconductor shortage made the vulnerabilities in the global supply chain brutally clear.
Chip shortages reverberated throughout the
world economy and drove countries to accelerate domestic chip production via subsidies and
enact protectionary policies. These protectionary policies may have unintended consequences.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

HOW TO PREPARE
The future of
computing presents
both threats and
opportunities
for business. To
prepare for the
future, businesses
should consider
implementing the
following actions.

36

Computing

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
INVEST IN INFRASTRUCTURE

GROW THE QUANTUM TALENT POOL

The ongoing effects of the chip shortage,
coupled with inflation and geopolitical
tensions, will continue to make it difficult
for some industries to meet demand. Businesses should be proactive in finding ways
to mitigate the effects of the chip shortage,
such as by diversifying supply chains or
finding alternative sources of chips.

Smart telcos can establish dominance
early by providing the best building blocks
for the metaverse ecosystem. Companies
can position themselves now to provide
edge computing services, and capture
in-metaverse data to help their customers
improve decision-making and products, or
provide trusted cybersecurity services fit for
the virtual world.

There is a shortage of skilled quantum
workers, which could hinder quantum
breakthroughs and make it difficult for companies to compete in the era of post-quantum cryptography. To prepare for the future,
businesses should focus on attracting and
training technically skilled labor in quantum
computing.

SECURE IOT

PROTECT AGAINST IP THEFT

While the iInternet of Things (IoT) will bring
many benefits, it also introduces vulnerabilities through the collection and transmission
of personal data and the possibilities of
weak security measures. Businesses should
ensure their IoT devices are secure and that
appropriate measures are in place to protect personal data.

Quantum computing could be used to reverse-engineer proprietary technology and
algorithms, leading to the theft of intellectual property (IP) or trade secrets. Businesses
should take steps to safeguard their IP,
such as by implementing strong cybersecurity measures and being proactive in threat
detection and mitigating potential threats.

PREPARE FOR FUTURE SUPPLY
CHAIN DISRUPTIONS

© 2023 Future Today Institute

TECH

Computing

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How will the
limitations of
Moore’s law affect
the performance
and capabilities of
current business
processes?

2
How can we take
advantage of
new computing
architectures and
models?

3
How should we
plan for, and adapt
to, the rollout
of 5G and the
development of
6G?
What are the
consequences
of falling behind
these technologies
for our operations
and competitive
position?

37

4
What are the
implications to our
business depending
on which country
is the first to
achieve quantum
supremacy?

5
Do we have the
necessary skills
and expertise to
take advantage
of these emerging
technologies?
If not, what do we
need to do to upskill
or attract the right
talent?

6
Is our business or
industry vulnerable
to computingrelated supply
chain disruptions?
If so, what steps
can we take to
mitigate the risks
and eliminate
points of failure?

7
How can we engage
with researchers
and developers
of neuromorphic
computing
technologies to
collaborate on the
development and
deployment of
these technologies,
and how can we
stay informed
about the latest
developments in
this field?

8
How can we ensure
that our deployment
of emerging
technologies, like
AI and quantum
computing, is done
so in a responsible
and ethical
manner?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

News & Information

INDUSTRY

NEWS AND INFORMATION TRENDS SUMMARY
Virtual
environments,
artificial
intelligence,
and new ways
of consuming
information are
forcing news
and information
business models to
transform.

Key Insights for 2023
Generative applications of AI—like OpenAI’s
DALL-E 2 image generator—have gone mainstream. This new class of tools is actively
rewriting workflows and creating new norms for
consuming media.
Large language and transformer models are
revolutionizing how search engines answer
questions. These innovations will radically alter
the way consumers discover new content—and
how publishers build relationships with their
audiences.

funders, but legacy media companies remain
skeptical of changing operations.
AI researchers are actively investigating how
algorithms can be used to improve news recommendations, detect fake or misleading media
pieces, and identify facts in disparate sources.
Without engagement from journalists and media
organizations, this work risks solving the wrong
problems or creating deeper issues for the
future of news.

Trust in news is at a historic low around the
world, leaving news organizations vulnerable to
reputational crises, which might originate from
human error or from a coordinated assault by
bad actors.
Journalists increasingly need technical knowledge to trace stories, protect themselves from
cyberattacks, and monetize their work. The
demand for these skills can be filled by training,
building external partnerships, or breaking down
silos in legacy organizations.
Innovative applications of emerging technology generate excitement and enthusiasm from

39

© 2023 Future Today Institute

News & Information

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
Executives will be
challenged in 2023
to grow market share
and revenue.

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
Subscription programs will battle
economic headwinds and market
saturation.
Inflation will put growing pressure on consumers to prioritize expenses. The temptation for publishers will be to fight churn
exclusively with tried-and-true market tactics like discounting to get more subscribers
in the door, and price discrimination to earn
more from a diminishing subscriber base.
The way forward, however, is for publishers
to seek real innovation for their core products to ensure continued relevance—and the
integrity of their value chain into the future.
Evolving search interfaces will change
how consumers discover new content.
Voice assistants and natural language
search results will gradually replace the
traditional link-based search-engine result
page, disrupting a key audience growth tactic and decreasing traffic to on-site paywalls.
This trend will force publishers to reconsider
how they connect with new users.

40

Device manufacturers can deliver
bundled content, disrupting
publishers’ relationships with
audiences.
Apple News and Google Discover aggregate a mix of local and national news
directly onto the home screens of Apple
and Android devices, respectively. Those
apps—designed by highly resourced teams
out of Silicon Valley and backed by large
content-licensing budgets—directly serve
the news needs of many consumers, diminishing the need to turn to a local newspaper
or public broadcaster.

graphics, and shifting social expectations.
Most legacy publishers—and even digital
upstarts—don’t have the organizational
culture to respond to those multidisciplinary
challenges.
Trust in institutions—and in news
media, particularly—is at historic
lows.
News organizations live and die by their
reputations. Without trust, it’s impossible
to build the audience needed to sell advertising at scale or to convert consumers to
subscribers.

Innovation related to the creation,
distribution, and monetization of
information is happening across
multiple, unrelated domains.
Resource-constrained publishers need to
stay abreast of developments in AI, hardware manufacturing, and network connectivity. The uncertainty posed by those
domains is magnified by the impacts of
government regulation, changing demo-

© 2023 Future Today Institute

News & Information

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
Organizations seeking
to take an active
role in shaping the
future of news should
monitor emerging
opportunity spaces.

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
• Large language models like OpenAI’s
GPT-3 and Google’s Pathways Language
Model can be used to generate and publish new types of content.
• Emerging devices will demand new programming formats. Creators who partner
with tech companies early will be able
to set norms and negotiate better deals
than those who wait.
• Advances in generative AI have created
production-ready tools that can power
multilingual translation, chatbots, and
personalization.
• Generative AI also makes it easier to
transform the format of content: Text
can become audio. Audio can be paired
with visuals to create video. Video can
be summarized effectively into text. This
opens the door for creators to distribute
content in formats, and on platforms,
they might not otherwise have explored.

41

• In a low-trust environment, brands that
build and maintain durable relationships
with consumers will thrive. Publishers
that have accrued trust over decades can
translate that across distribution formats
with thoughtful product development.
• Teams of computer scientists around the
world are exploring how to apply artificial
intelligence to identifying lies and misinformation on social media and in the
news. Organizations that identify those
researchers could build relationships to
shape and play a role in that research.
They may also identify talented AI experts interested in working on problems
related to the future of news.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

News & Information

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
Are we prepared
for a future where
generative AI
further reduces
barriers to creating
compelling
content?
A world where
the power to
distribute content
is increasingly
concentrated
among device
makers?

2
How would our
organization
respond to a
trust crisis in our
audience?
Are we prepared to
defend against bad
actors who want to
smear our brand?

3
What new
opportunities are
possible for our
company using
generative AI?

4
What assumptions
about content
distribution are
baked into our
operating model?
How might those
change over the
next two years?
What can we do
to mitigate the
risk that those
assumptions are
wrong?

5
Does my team or
department need
new skill sets to
optimally address
climate or energy
questions?

6
Is our company’s
revenue
concentrated in
one place? How
long would it take
to meaningfully
change that?

7
What ethical
norms do new
technologies
challenge when
they create
content?

8
Do we have the
knowledge,
experience, and
talent in place
to respond to
emerging threats?
Do we need to build
new partnerships
with technologists?

9
What will it take
to socialize the
opportunities and
risks posed by new
technologies inside
our organization?
How can we
create a sense of
urgency among our
stakeholders?

42

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Financial Services

INDUSTRY

FINANCIAL SERVICES TRENDS SUMMARY
Digitization,
invisible
interactions, and
developments
from incumbent
players and new
entrants is rapidly
transforming the
financial services
sector.

44

Key Insights for 2023
Multiyear efforts to digitize financial services are
finally coming to fruition, enabling the explosion of financial technologies that underpin the
movement to open banking. Open banking can
lead to open finance, which can accelerate open
data, and fundamentally change how scarce
resources are distributed and allocated.
Customer-centric and socially responsible
approaches are increasingly table stakes in the
design of financial services products.
In 2023, expect increasing commoditization of
financial services infrastructures.
During the next 18-24 months, Decentralized
Finance (DeFi) will mature, sparking new investment, growth, and adoption.

Look for large nonfinancial players with significant centralized market power, such as platform
providers and regulators, to play increasingly
active roles in setting rules and guiding the evolution of financial services.
As back-office infrastructure has opened up and
become standardized, banking-as-a-service
providers are growing increasingly popular. We
anticipate growth in the space during the next
24 months.
New forms of data modeling and credit scoring
will expand access to financial systems in 2023.
Responsible innovation will be crucial to the
future of alternative credit scoring, especially as
machine learning techniques and generative artificial intelligence systems are applied at scale.

Future Today Institute expects mainstream
financial services and decentralized financial
services to run in parallel for some time. As DeFi
continues to mature, organizations will gain
hard-fought insights around structural and customer protection systems. We anticipate legacy
finance will evolve while trying to build connective tissue to decentralized systems, with the
explicit goal of absorbing enough functionality
to avoid total disintermediation.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Financial Services

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
Executives will
experience ongoing
rapid change as
the digitization of
financial services
matures. This will
substantially increase
the complexity and
interconnectivity of
the entire financial
services ecosystem.

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
1. CORPORATE INNOVATORS

3. DEFI BUILDERS

5. VC INVESTORS

• Prepare to fast follow as waves of startups
reach maturity and demonstrate viability of
new markets and business models.

• Prepare for potential regulation.

• Seek out companies with break-even strategies and healthy unit economics.

• Look to startups with new business models
and local product market fit that seek to expand regionally or globally.
• Build the corporate muscles to make strategic
decisions in uncertain environments by creating clear guidance across the organization.
• Develop intentionality around acting, watching, or ignoring.
2. REGULATORS
• Work with creators and builders to convey
institutional knowledge learned from past
dealings with legacy financial services.
• Seek out diverse perspectives and opinions.
• Stay focused on the intent of key rules, and
regularly revisit them to ensure they achieve
that intent.
• Be sure to understand the market power of
each stakeholder.

45

• Adopt a global mindset with local implementation.
• Support parallel development to legacy
financial services, while establishing sufficient
rules and guardrails for the industry to mature.
• Prepare for DeFi and legacy financial services
to become increasingly interlinked.
4. STARTUPS
• Look to flywheel business models, and a landand-expand commercialization strategy.
• Expect securing funding will become significantly harder, and limit burn rates accordingly.
• Build milestones and checkpoints into growth
projections, and be prepared to forego certain
expenses and deals if those milestones aren’t
achieved.

• Prepare for internal rounds and decreasing
valuations.
• Help failing companies shut down quickly, and
with dignity.
6. RETAIL INVESTORS
• Expect story stocks and meme stocks to revert to more standard valuations.
• Prepare for new asset classes, like NFTs and
fractional investments, to become a part of a
well-diversified portfolio.
• Keep an eye out for financial advice from
non-traditional sources.

• Assume flat or down valuation funding
rounds.
• Get to breakeven as soon as possible.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Financial Services

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
HOW TO SPOT SECTOR OPPORTUNITIES
White space
• Watch entities that set rules for owners of
relationships with large customers: governments, platform operators, banks, exchanges, etc.
• Watch for when those entities make rule or
access changes that enable startups to enter
previously restricted spaces.
• After startups enter such spaces to iterate
and fail fast, look to large corporates to
seek partnerships or deals to capture those
markets.
Ignored space
• Look to startups that fulfill the customer
needs that large institutions don’t address,
either because doing so would cannibalize
their business or because it doesn’t pay
off to target small but fast-growing market
segments.

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
MACRO OPPORTUNITIES RIPE FOR
ACCELERATED CHANGE IN 2023
• Using financial data accessed through open
banking.
• Converting existing money movement to
real-time and near real-time frequency.
• Efforts to make DeFi mainstream (regulation,
on and off ramps, governance).
• Orchestration of back-office intermediaries
for invisible customer and business experiences.
• Commoditization of financial services.
• Financial inclusion to increase the global
market for financial services.
• Creators increasing their market power.
• Platforms reinforcing their walled gardens.
• Social responsibility becoming table stakes.

• Look to geopolitical tensions to create more
room for domestic first solutions.

46

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Financial Services

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
What areas are
being ceded to
startups, whether
intentionally or
unintentionally?

9
How can the
industry learn from,
and prepare for,
the influx of new
startups?

47

2
What happens
if financial
services become a
commodity?

10
Who within our
organization
is ensuring our
readiness to quickly
follow what’s
happening at the
fringe?

3
What opportunities
arise when players
across all industries
are forced to open
their back offices to
third parties?

4
How do preprogrammed
financial decisions
like standing orders
evolve to represent
intent, such as
“make sure my
checking account
never runs out of
money”?

5
How does this
industry sell to
an algorithm? Do
business models
break if a human
isn’t the ultimate
decision-maker?

6
What does the
consumer banking
website of the
future look like?

7
How do financial
players adapt to the
changing balance
of power between
individuals and
institutions?

8
Who owns
a customer
relationship,
and how many
intermediaries can
there be between
the customer and
the final product?
How do we balance
complexity versus
simplicity?
How many
intermediaries is
too many to deliver
great customer
experience or to
ensure safety and
security?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Health Care & Medicine

INDUSTRY

HEALTH CARE AND MEDICINE TRENDS SUMMARY
A constellation of
forces is aligning,
and promising
to result in a
transformation
of every aspect
of health care:
operational,
clinical, financial,
and patient care
itself.

Key Insights for 2023
Amazon is health care’s most ambitious disruptor, and its every acquisition or new service
announcement moves markets. In January
2023, the company announced RxPass, a
$5-per-month subscription service for unlimited
prescriptions. In the future, look for Amazon to
execute on a broad strategy that aims at nothing
less than reworking the entire US health care
ecosystem.
Venture capitalists now target rural communities, which traditionally lack access to health
care, with medical startups. In order for bio- and
health tech-focused startups to find footings in
the market, they need real-world applications.
This means getting a foot in the door of health
care systems, which is what investors are doing
as they launch partnerships to create pilot sites
for the startups in their portfolios.
Membership-based services and health tech
startups are creating new direct-to-consumer
(D2C) models that better fit the needs and lifestyles of younger, digitally savvy generations.
Americans can now legally obtain their medical
data, though existing systems make it difficult
to access most of it. That will change starting

49

in 2023, thanks to new policy changes, which
will create new opportunities and operational
challenges for health providers.
Breakthroughs in sensors and artificial intelligence are expanding the possibilities for remote
diagnosis. Data captured by clinical-grade sensors is triaged by algorithms, thereby reducing
the time from insights to action.
Brain-computer interfaces will begin clinical
trials in 2023.

concerns.
Since the start of the pandemic, consumer
adoption of digital fitness technologies has
skyrocketed. Health and fitness apps, connected
fitness equipment, and health-focused wearables are up 13%, 15%, and 16%, respectively,
since early 2020. The next wave of fitness and
health-focused technology growth will focus
on scaling meditation, sleep, and mental health
technologies so they are more affordable—and
more accessible—for the mass market.

Medical misinformation will continue to pose
significant risks. In addition to disinformation
campaigns about viruses and vaccines, a new
breed of medical deepfakes in diagnostic imagery maliciously adds––or removes––tumors and
other conditions.
Whole-genome sequencing, to screen babies
for genetic diseases, could become a routine
part of wellness exams in the near-future.
Emerging therapies are allowing doctors to treat
genetic disorders in utero.
Researchers are developing genetically engineered organs in animals for xenotransplantation, or transplantation into human patients. This
could unlock a new type of medical agribusiness—and, of course, a whole host of ethical

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Health Care & Medicine

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
As emerging
technologies bring
the power of the
laboratory into our
homes and AI expands
the possibilities for
remote diagnosis,
knock-on effects
will be realized this
decade. Ongoing
disruption is likely.

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
Executives and their teams must confront their cherished beliefs about what
health care has always been—and
develop new mental models for what
it could be in the future. It would be a
mistake to focus only on three- or fiveyear strategic plans, because big tech
players (Amazon, Meta, Google, Apple)
and well-capitalized startups play a longer game. In the next few years, leaders
will need to develop a refined vision for
future growth. We recommend that you
evaluate how the technology trends in
this report are likely to shape the futures
of health care operations, as well as
the practice of medicine and the health
insurance ecosystem.
Companies seeking to take an active
role in shaping the future of health
and medicine should be developing a
point of view on technology (hardware,
software), data collection, the patient
experience, external partners, and the

50

talent pipeline. Which of these will likely
impact your enterprise earliest? Which
might take longer to develop, but could
have a larger impact on your operations?
Wearable devices are moving from the
fringe to the mainstream, and consumers are looking for actionable insights.
They are also more health-conscious in
the wake of the pandemic. Additional
factors include the rollout of 5G networks and relaxed rules on telemedicine and remote patient monitoring.
Longer-range road maps in the health,
medical, and wearable space can balance near-term expectations with more
aggressive research agendas. Rehearsing the futures of health care using
strategic foresight has never been more
important.

Health Care & Medicine

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How could homebased diagnostic
systems disrupt our
business?

51

2
If direct-toconsumer tests
threaten our
profitability, can
we develop new
products or services
to compete with
upstarts?

3
How might
emerging
technology unlock
new growth
opportunities for
our business?

4
If we source new/
more biometric
data, could we
develop new and
deeper insights
about our patients
and customers?

5
How could
advancements
in some of these
health and medical
tech trends make
our company
vulnerable?

6
How do these
trends change our
perspective on risk?

7
Do we have the
right knowledge,
experience, and
talent in place to
take advantage of
these trends?

8
In a field where
breakthroughs can’t
be scheduled and
research can take
a decade or more
to produce a viable
candidate, how can
we create a sense
of urgency and take
meaningful action
right now?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Government, Policy & Security

INDUSTRY

GOVERNMENT, POLICY AND SECURITY TRENDS SUMMARY
The intersection of
a global polycrisis
and increasingly
sophisticated
cybersecurity risks
are contributing
to the creation
of a new global
disorder.

Key Insights for 2023
The internet has permanently splintered. Policies
in the West to promote a free internet largely
failed, leaving a fragmented digital ecosystem
with competing interests to grow. If there ever
was a truly open, global internet, it’s over.
Data from myriad sources is now viewed as a
component of geopolitical power. Country leaders view data as central to competitive advantage, while tech companies rely on it to thrive
and grow. This positions Big Tech and government as adversaries in countries like France, the
US, and the UK, while China’s Big Tech companies are reluctant bedfellows with the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) leaders.
In 2023, the EU will finalize its AI Act, which will
focus on the use of AI systems that use citizen
data for potentially detrimental purposes. It’s
viewed as the world’s first attempt at creating
broad, enforceable standards governing the use
of AI. While AI developed for national security
or military uses will likely be exempt from the
EU’s new regulations, social media platforms
like Facebook and TikTok could find it difficult to
comply.
The global pandemic accelerated digital trans-

53

formation. From newly automated city services
to the now widespread acceptance of telehealth,
modernization initiatives are being deployed
across local, city, state/provincial, and national
governments. This sets the stage for long-term
digital transformation of government administration.
Industrial policy has suddenly reemerged as
a tool to bolster science and technology competitiveness. After falling out of favor in the US
during the 1980s, there is now growing enthusiasm in many countries for new policies supporting technology-driven industries considered
strategically important (such as the semiconductor chip industry).
Beijing has hundreds of basic research projects
underway, ranging from new quantum systems
and supercomputers to synthetic biology and
genetic engineering. China has restructured
its higher education system, positioning universities to conduct basic research at scale. As
the country starts to surpass the US in government-funded basic research, the US and other
governments now see basic research as a path
to enhance competitiveness.
Chinese companies will respond to government calls in 2023 to share their prosperity with
society through public-private partnerships

and financial support of basic research. Tencent, China’s mega e-commerce, social media,
gaming, and super app giant, will contribute $1.5
billion over 10 years to catalyze basic research in
biology, math, physics, and life sciences.
In the US, proposed bills to invest hundreds of
billions into technological development could
change the way we think about the government’s role in value creation. Those bills include
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act,
($550 billion), the Creating Helpful Incentives to
Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) and Science
Act ($280 billion), and the Inflation Reduction
Act ($390 billion). Collectively, they mark the
most aggressive funding plan for technology
and science in a generation.
The United Arab Emirates hopes to become a
neutral, global hub for emerging technology
and policy innovation. In the coming year, look
for advancements in health care, autonomous
driving, cryptocurrencies, e-commerce, and AI.
The UAE has publicly stated plans to be home to
at least 20 unicorns––startups worth $1 billion or
more––by the end of 2031.
Multilateral export controls are created by
groups of states to informally govern the exports
of certain technologies for mutual benefit. But
increasingly there is misalignment among allies,

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Government, Policy & Security

INDUSTRY

GOVERNMENT, POLICY AND SECURITY TRENDS SUMMARY
especially when it comes to China’s semiconductor industry. Such controls could backfire in
2023.
In 2023, existing and proposed privacy regulations will challenge organizations, thanks to
local and regional variations. Within the EU,
sweeping frameworks like the GDPR are being
enforced differently in member countries, while
stringent new biometric regulations in the US
vary from state to state. Complexity is unlikely to
be resolved.

it difficult to protect from espionage.
Powered by AI, lethal autonomous weapons
systems can find targets on their own and make
decisions to complete a mission. Last year, 70
nations delivered a joint statement at the UN
General Assembly calling for a ban on autonomous weapons—little progress has been made
in the months since.

Biometric data isn’t stored as securely as it
should be, opening the door to theft and manipulation this year.
During the past three years, the risk of ransomware has escalated across local governments,
school districts, and hospital systems. Ransomware gangs are now offering their services for
hire, and even marketing their capabilities and
tools to outsiders. Hackers are professionalizing,
developing commercial products, and operating
increasingly lucrative businesses.
Cybercriminals could start targeting underwater
IT infrastructure, including subsea cables that
allow countries to exchange power and citizens
to get online. Fully 95% of the world’s internet
traffic travels underwater at some point, making

54

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Government, Policy & Security

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
Because of globalization,
technology, government,
and security are completely
intertwined.
Manufacturing the equipment required by
modern business—laptops, mobile phones,
machinery­—relies on a supplier network
often spanning numerous countries. The
means of collecting, using, and storing data
typically crosses state and country lines.
With policy uncertainty growing and advanced technologies creating new pressure
for lawmakers, it’s more important than ever
for executives to monitor developments
and for government leaders to engage in
meaningful, long-term planning to forecast
knock-on impacts of potential legislation.
The intersection of technology, policy,
and politics affects every organization. As
lawmakers craft new types of regulations to
address emerging technologies, businesses must address policy uncertainty in their
strategic planning. Anticompetitiveness

55

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
lawsuits and antitrust investigations will
have a chilling effect on merger and acquisition activity by the big tech companies. If
one organization under scrutiny provides
some (or all) of your technology stack,
further improvements and features could
be paused if lawsuits siphon off resources.
Likewise, how a company collects, uses,
and stores data; the technology acquisitions business units develop; the vendors
and partners they select; and investments
they make in security all affect its future.
The dynamic nature of cybersecurity will directly impact corporate strategic initiatives
in digital transformation, operating income
growth, international expansion, and more.
Policy uncertainty creates hurdles for
innovation teams, and in both the US and
China, the administrations have demonstrated clear, decisive plans. This should
give innovators the foundations to work
on new products and services related to
climate change, transportation, biotech,
artificial intelligence, and blockchain technologies. Security innovators have a unique

set of skills that could aid in a company’s
approach to privacy and safeguarding. One
of the biggest challenges companies face
is a lack of creativity about adversaries or
next-order outcomes. For example, before a
company launches a new product, it should
host a workshop to investigate possible
ways the product could unintentionally
bring harm to the business.
It’s clear that China intends to lead the
world in many areas of R&D, including AI,
biotech and synthetic biology, pharmaceuticals, transportation, climate change
mitigation, and space. In recent years,
China launched new efforts to repatriate
researchers from US and European posts.
But tech companies are also poaching
talent from academic departments as well
as other companies. With so much competition, companies should develop strategies
for R&D team acquisition and retention.
Security should be top of mind, but within
many companies, R&D units struggle to
keep pace with the changing technology
landscape. This can result in pet projects

taking up too much time without leading to
desired results—or moving without consideration of security or privacy implications.
The cadence of R&D teams must be adjusted to prioritize privacy and security.
As we build our new normal—working from
anywhere, managing security breaches,
adapting to patchwork regulation—adaptability will be key to every organization’s
ability to thrive and succeed.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Government, Policy & Security

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How do the
trends change our
perspective on risk?

9
Can we develop
actionable, longterm plans that
will withstand
leadership
changes?

56

2
Is our organization
appropriately
resourced to
prevent against
and respond to
cyberattacks?

10

3
Does our team
have an expansive
viewpoint on
emerging threats
and attack
surfaces?

4
What aspects of our
business make us a
target for attacks?
Will our company’s
values, or the way
we interact with
consumers, attract
the ire of hactivists?

5
As lawmakers,
are we carefully
considering the
downstream
impacts of
proposed
regulations?

6
As technology
evolves, how will
our local, state,
provincial, countrylevel regulations
keep pace without
stifling innovation
and growth?

7
If our company
operates in markets
where a patchwork
of regulations is
likely to persist, how
can we adapt?

8
How can we play
a role in shaping
policy related
to our industry’s
evolution?

Have we developed
scenarios to
understand possible
second- and thirdorder impacts?

How can we
develop the
knowledge,
experience, and
talent to leverage
these trends?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Space

INDUSTRY

SPACE TRENDS SUMMARY
Tech breakthroughs
that enable
humans to explore
space like never
before are leading
to a new space
economy, but they
also create political
challenges.

Key Insights for 2023
Access to space, by private citizens or commercial entities, is becoming more affordable, and
cost is just one of the barriers to entry that are
lowering for both public and private institutions.
As accessibility increases, previously unrepresented nations are entering the space race, as
well as startups and enterprises worldwide. This
increasing accessibility is resulting in surprising
collaborations.
Nations with like-minded initiatives are setting
their sights on space, resulting in the formation
of alliances including space blocs. As more
blocs form and space exploration continues,
existing treaties governing space are proving
increasingly obsolete.
Geopolitical tensions are beginning to prove
consequential in space. China once considered
Russia an important collaborator for future
moon projects and missions, but as sanctions
resulting from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have
impeded progress, China is looking for new
long-term partners.

leave the planet and use satellites and telecommunications devices that impact our experience
on Earth. The need for its removal provides
revenue opportunities for the space economy.
Even with a reduction in the expense of sending payloads—the spacebound crafts, cargo,
or people necessary for development beyond
Earth—costly resource production and in situ
manufacturing will be required for long-term
space missions to succeed. One example might
be creating oxygen from Mars’ carbon dioxide–
rich atmosphere. Opportunities for resource extraction and mining, as well as in situ processes
for harvesting materials, will drive revenues for
the future space economy.
The ability to manufacture in micro- and zero-gravity environments—areas in space with
less gravity than Earth, or where gravity is
completely absent—will become a competitive
advantage. Products and services that employ
micro- and zero-gravity dynamics, such as
orbital labs that grow stem cells, will create new
uses.

Space junk creates concerns not only as waste
but as clutter that can endanger or inhibit
further development—it threatens our ability to

58

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Space

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
Companies not explicitly
working within the space
economy should still monitor
trends in this report. Future
Today Institute research
suggests that emerging
developments over the next
decade will intersect with a
host of adjacent industries,
from agriculture to energy
to telecommunications and
beyond.
UNCERTAINTY AROUND BAD ACTORS

Militant acts by fractious and implacable
governments are increasingly threatening
the operation of satellites and megaconstellations. Hostilities materialized in 2022
relating to commercial satellites used to aid
Ukraine against the invasion by Russia. Defense initiatives are being enacted to stave

59

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
off the potential threats of these bad actors,
but little can be done proactively.
ADHERING TO COMPLIANCE AND
REGULATORY CHANGES

As authorities emphasize judicious action
regarding the use of satellites and payloads
entering orbit, strict regulations, especially
if enacted quickly, could disrupt operations.
Startups with business plans relying on
megaconstellations for space-related activities and commerce could be caught off
guard by caps on the number of satellites
entering orbit, or by regulator restrictions
on uses.
OPPONENTS TO SPACE-BASED INNOVATIONS

Vocal critics of space exploration and
innovation abound. They suggest we focus
first on Earth-based challenges, rather than
expediting resources to impact our experience in space. If such sentiments prove
contagious, they could decrease governmental interest, affecting funding opportunities for startups and rendering our space
aspirations futile.

BEING UPENDED BY SMALL BUT MIGHTY
PLAYERS

Space’s democratization should appear as
an unbounded opportunity, but a failure by
traditional entities to take advantage of it
could result in smaller, more nimble startups and organizations beating their competition to the chase. Spending time in space
will require applications from industries
present on Earth. Organizations must act
quickly or risk missing out on first-mover
advantages.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR GROWTH AND
TRANSFORMATION

Our analysis reveals unique opportunities
for organizations to unlock innovation and
growth.
Devising processes for manufacturing products in micro and zero gravity will result in
competitive advantages. By employing the
inner-dynamics of reduced gravity, industries can fabricate items at higher quantities
or with minimal constraints. Spillover effects
of space technologies have been an indus-

try hallmark for decades, and organizations
will find opportunities to apply the solutions
they offer here on Earth. With proper application, existing technologies can have
monumental impacts.
For example, mounting concerns resulting
from space junk accumulation create revenue opportunities for companies centered
on cleaning up messes. Both the public
and private sectors will have a growing,
vested interest in keeping the orbit free
from dangers associated with the detritus.
Meanwhile, extraction of local resources
and in situ processing will be critical to
survival in space and on new planets. Organizations that can provide necessary tools
and solutions for mining and manufacturing
will benefit. Provisions may include greenhouses for growing food, protein-producing bioreactors, or implements to unearth
resources from regolith.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Space

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
What new
opportunity space
can we create from
the phenomenon
of micro and zero
gravity? (The
answer might
concern an aspect
of production,
or the offering
of a service to
be experienced
firsthand.)

60

2
How can a
space factory
or lab give us an
advantage over our
competitors?

3
Are we prepared
for the existential
risk that the Kessler
Effect could cause
for services we use
in our daily lives,
such as GPS and
telecommunications? What backup
options do we
need in place when
space debris interferes with essential
systems?

4
What new service
and business
models can be
developed as
sending payloads
to space becomes
more affordable?

5
How can we use
satellite data
and associated
insights? Can
we find better,
alternative ways to
serve our customers
and help them
understand the
planet we live on?

6
How will the newest
discoveries made
via the JWST inform
our worldviews and
R&D investments?

7
What plans can
we put in place to
prepare to serve
a multi-planetary
species?

8
How will our
activities in space
affect and inform
our geopolitical
relationships on
Earth?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Supply Chain & Logistics

INDUSTRY

SUPPLY CHAIN AND LOGISTICS TRENDS SUMMARY
Geopolitical
and workforce
challenges crippled
the supply chain
in recent years,
but advancing
technologies could
enable a more
resilient future.

Key Insights for 2023
VISIBILITY/TRACK AND TRACE

Values-alignment driven consumerism and localism are disrupting where goods come from and
require transparency in how they are produced.
Real-time, end-to-end visibility through the use
of digital passports can prevent bottlenecks
through customs and the passing of products
from one source to another.
DIGITIZED MANAGEMENT

Warehouse space is a premium and should be
utilized to its fullest with automation and management systems.
AI needs to be utilized beyond creating predictive analytics and should be tapped into to assist
in decision making.
SHORTENING THE SUPPLY CHAIN

The utilization of crowd-sourced delivery platforms will continue as consumers continue to
expect faster and more frictionless delivery.
Micro-fulfillment centers are a consideration

62

when looking for more urban infill opportunities
and for bringing goods closer to the consumer.
CLIMATE SUSTAINABILITY

Climate change, sustainability, and ESG are
creating new challenges for companies to thrive
in a world where consumers are determined to
reduce their carbon footprint.
Packaging might be the next big wave in opportunities for creating a more sustainable supply
chain, through the use of reusable and self-healing materials.
LABOR DEVELOPMENT, UPHEAVALS, AND
SHORTAGES

a buying spree for a particular product, causing
unpredictable runs that manufacturers may not
be prepared for.
The rise in nationalism and global conflict are
creating new challenges for transportation and
logistics to overcome.
RESILIENCY THROUGH DIVERSIFICATION

Diversifying procurement can alleviate weaknesses in the global supply chain by considering
nearshoring or reshoring.
New infrastructure may be needed to diversify
routes as ports become smarter about preparing
for future disruptions.

Worker attraction and retention is achievable
through upskilling and reskilling opportunities,
especially when paired with new tech certifications that automation requires.
Continue to watch union action and difficult
contract negotiations as they threaten to create
new disruptions.
GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN DISRUPTIONS

Disruptions are coming from unexpected
sources, for instance when social media spurs

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Supply Chain & Logistics

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
The talent pool is shrinking in many industries. Finding skilled labor to fill empty roles
is harder, and many experienced supply
chain and logistics workers are retiring.
Employing cobots and automation can be a
double-edged sword, as workers may prefer
to avoid companies that utilize these solutions. Training programs and skills development can develop and attract new talent,
and retain the current workforce.
With consumers’ demand for transparency
growing, tracking the end-to-end loop can
be a granular and challenging exercise.
With new procurement and sourcing under
consideration to fulfill environmental, social,
and governance (ESG) goals, it presents
an opportunity to improve the tracking of
resource usage. Another challenge will be
where to report the information gathered
that will be of most relevance to the company, the consumer, and governments.

63

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
The pandemic, the war in Ukraine, and the
process of decoupling with China highlight
vulnerabilities in the supply chain and the
need to prepare. Digital twin modeling can
help predict such events, but acquiring the
data to set up the model is challenging.
These models should take into account
global climate change disruption as well.
Last-mile solutions are among the most
challenging for the logistics industry.
Consumers have different expectations,
depending on the market or the specific
goods. Social media may help prioritize
which products need to be first up on the
last-mile list. Manufacturers can use this
data to decide where to invest in micro-fulfillment or additive manufacturing warehouses within the urban infrastructure.
Future Today Institute research suggests
that the future of manufacturing and the
supply chain will be positively influenced by
emerging technology. Opportunity spaces
include:

VR TRAINING

NEARSHORING AND RE-GLOBALIZATION

Training in development of skills is no longer location dependent with virtual reality
training modules, opening opportunities
to tap into a global talent pool. Companies
need to examine current training modules and invest in converting them into
VR training modules, which could then be
licensed to other businesses to generate
new revenue.

Re-globalization and nearshoring both offer
the prospect of stability through diversification. Finding the right balance between
both options means understanding which
global conflicts in which regions pose the
most risk or opportunity. Monitoring these
initiatives over time could guide a strategy
for flexible manufacturing or access to new
talent markets.

SMART CONTRACTS

HUB-AND-SPOKE AUTONOMOUS MODELS

Smart contracts can be drawn up to determine when certain conditions are met,
such as meeting ESG goals, before they go
into effect. Since these contracts are stored
on a blockchain, they can provide track
and trace solutions when data is requested. Legal implications will be the first step
to begin tackling where and when to use
smart contracts.

When considering the last mile, human and
autonomous options are key considerations.
As autonomous transportation becomes
more viable, there is an opportunity to restructure the human talent pool to fulfill the
last-mile delivery needs. This could become
a marketing strategy for employees by allowing them to work closer to home. Logistics teams need to become well-versed in
autonomous transportation to be prepared
for industry changes.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Supply Chain & Logistics

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How should
we prepare for
ESG disclosure
requirements along
our supply chain?

9
What emerging
countries offer
re-globalization
potential for
new sources and
procurement of
goods?

64

2
What training
modules can be
digitized for faster
learning?

3
Where should
autonomous
enhancements be
incorporated into
the manufacturing
process?

4
What decisions
can we allow to be
made autonomously
within the supply
chain and logistics
framework?

5
Is the company
prepared for a
viral social media
event that could
affect product
availability?

6
What is our risk
tolerance given
extreme weather
events and our
transportation
partners?

7
Where do we
need real-time
monitoring for our
supply chain?

8
Where we are
over dependent
on imports from
countries that are
near conflict-risk
countries?

10
What digital twin
models would best
serve us for being
better prepared
for conflict,
congestion, crisis,
etc.?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Entertainment

INDUSTRY

ENTERTAINMENT TRENDS SUMMARY
Experiences
are moving to
a collaborative
model, opening
up the opportunity
for repeated but
not repetitive
engagement with
entertainment
franchises.

Key Insights for 2023
STREAMING

Power is shifting from content platforms to influencers as the latter’s options for sharing content
increases and new opportunities to create revenue streams expand.
Tapping into a global talent pool will become
easier than ever with a range of new tools that
expand collaboration for hybrid teams.
With the introduction of haptic devices, storytelling will engage all of the senses, not just vision
and sound.
Storytelling will venture into personalization.
Instead of creating a finite, linear product, different story modules will be combined in different
ways.
Crowdsourced content, where viewers collectively decide what happens next, is gaining
traction as a mainstream genre of narrative.
Digital twins of celebrities will start to expand
the earning potential of their real-life counterparts.

66

This year, AI is moving from supporting to leading the creative process—writing scripts, creating music, and directing.
As dubbing becomes more automated, AI will
translate and voice text and adjust the lip movements of actors to fit different languages.
One-stop-shop video creation software is scaling
the production of marketing materials and might
soon make its way into narrative storytelling.
THE ARTS

The NFT market has cooled. Uses in the visual
art ecosystem are still elusive, but relevance
might expand in gaming, as digital tokens can be
used to grant membership or unlock experiences.
Intellectual property rights are not ready to sufficiently address new forms of entertainment or
the globalization of content.
Performance spaces are turning into multiuse
venues that not only accommodate different
audience sizes and performance needs but also
house shops, food and drink establishments, and
museums.

Theater productions are experimenting with
different forms of audience participation and
personalization, blurring the lines between video
game, live performance, and film.
Real-time holographic projections will open up
the possibility of live experiences occurring in
multiple places at once.
Virtual reality concerts will start to move from
celebrity guest-stints in video games to standalone experiences.
Immersive art is delivering replicable works
whose value lies in the cultural momentum they
create, not their singularity.
AI art—still and video—is moving into the mainstream, raising questions about copyright issues
and what makes art valuable.
Digital art has therapeutic effects, and health
applications are emerging.
AMUSEMENT PARKS

Virtual reality rides in theme parks are morphing
from passive, isolating experiences to interactive, social ones where guests can move freely
through a space.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

INDUSTRY

Entertainment

ENTERTAINMENT TRENDS SUMMARY
Smart contracts can enable demand-based bidding systems for products such as line-skipping
passes, creating real-time optimization for guest
experiences at theme parks.
The classic amusement park experience is
expanding as companies produce not only small
scale pop-ups and mega parks but also begin to
integrate some of that imaginary-world feeling
into consumers’ daily lives via digital interactions.
Big entertainment players such as Disney and
Universal aim to link their streaming with their
theme park operations to provide holistic, personalized experiences.
Entertainment and education merge in museums, zoos, and other institutions that use
augmented reality (AR) and VR to add interactive
and gamified elements to their exhibits.
Personalized AR and VR elements in theme
parks not only increase the realism of the imaginary world and pull the visitor deeper into the
narrative; the technology also encourages repeat
visits by making each individual experience of an
attraction unique.

67

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Entertainment

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE
RISKS
ESCALATED CYBER RISKS

Increased digitization often brings with
it the risk of cyberattacks. As more core
processes go digital, the implications
become correspondingly more severe. If a
digital celebrity is hacked, the damage to
the brand can forever hamper its earning
potential. As AI molds storylines to personal
tastes, attacks can influence that experience and turn it into a harmful or traumatic
experience for the viewer, whether the
episode occurs on a streaming platform or
in a theme park. When technology evolves,
it is crucial to build and evolve security at
the same time.
DIGITAL ABUNDANCE

A downside of digitization is its ease of replication and the potential for overexposure
of the market to a particular asset. A large
part of the value proposition of entertainment is the rarity and exceptionalism of its
talent—there is only one Mindy Kaling or
one Kathryn Bigelow. If technology enables

68

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?
omnipresence of talent and an exponential
increase in production of assets, it may result in market fatigue and loss of interest.
MEDIOCRE STORYTELLING

Democratization of storytelling might
empower audiences in new ways, but
majority opinions do not necessarily create
the most engaging stories. Taking risks,
making unusual choices, and providing
unique perspectives are crucial ingredients
for excellent storytelling, a gift not given to
everyone—and an improbable outcome of
crowdsourced decisions. After the novelty
factor of co-authoring narratives wears off,
we might wake up to a landscape of mediocre storytelling that is not able to provide us
the emotional engagement we crave.
A NEW VALUE PROPOSITION

The question remains how humanity will
respond to content created by AI. Will
audiences flock to digital twins of their
favorite celebrities? How will we relate to
and value stories that are created by nonhumans? Storytelling has been used since

the beginning of time to share experiences
and create connections. Will the perceived
value of synthetically created content, and
as a result the interest in and willingness to
spend money on that content, decline?

OPPORTUNITY SPACES
GLOBAL STORYTELLING

New collaborative tools provide the opportunity to employ a global talent pool that
has been trained thanks to ever-widening
access to digital creator tools. Such an
abundance of diverse talent brings with
it the opportunity for nuanced, localized
storytelling that deepens access to and
understanding of different cultures, demographics, and marginalized communities by
creating shareable experiences.
DEFINING NEW ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES

As AI takes center stage in the creation
process, it shifts responsibilities for those
who have previously been in control: directors, producers, designers, and artists. New
skills need to be developed that empha-

size creative direction, supervising, and
adjusting, rather than doing the actual act
of creating. This shift will also change the
power dynamics of an industry traditionally driven by the idiosyncratic visions of its
most successful creative talents. Whoever
is able to define the new paradigm and set
up corresponding processes and business
models will set the bar for the rest of the
industry to follow.
DECONSTRUCTED NARRATIVES CREATE
NEW INCOME STREAMS

As storytelling evolves from finite, linear
products to responsive environments that
are customizable by the audience, every
story has the potential to turn into a franchise with long-lasting earning potential.
Deconstructed narratives free up collaborative iteration between the audience and the
originator of the idea, and provides a canvas
for exploration. Every engagement with the
content can provide a singular experience
for the viewer, resulting in enduring curiosity about the possibilities—and willingness
to spend to experience them.

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Entertainment

INDUSTRY

HOW TO PREPARE

What should your organization do now to prepare for these trends?

SCALING PERSONALIZED CONTENT

If entertainment companies can access
more data about their consumers—not just
the data from within their own ecosystems
but also data from, say, Google or Facebook—they can begin to create personalized experiences at scale. These would be
limited primarily by the capabilities of the
tools creating the experiences—for instance, the ability for AR and VR systems to
provide real-time responsiveness, or of AI to
reassemble and customize content according to a viewer’s profile. Beyond that, the
biggest limitation will be the entertainment
industry’s own ability to produce enough
modular content to customize.

69

© 2023 Future Today Institute

Entertainment

INDUSTRY

KEY QUESTIONS FOR YOUR TEAM
1
How can you
ensure the safety
of future digital
assets? As content
evolves from a
finished product
to a personalized,
ever-changing
experience, how
can you monitor and
prevent unwanted
alterations from
third parties and
cyberattacks?

70

2
What changes do
you need to make to
your organization to
create interactive,
modular content
in addition to a
linear storytelling
product?

3
How would digital
entertainers, such
as digital twins of
real celebrities or
digital originals,
impact your
business model?

4
Will generative AI,
such as Dall-E, Bard
or ChatGPT, disrupt
your business,
and how can you
leverage it to your
advantage?

5
How can you begin
to pave the way
for blockchain
integration into your
operations to make
processes more
efficient, safe, and
transparent?

6
There is a tension
between the desire
for personalized
experiences and the
power of communal
experiences. Have
you determined
what your customer
prefers? And how
can you optimally
combine these
approaches in your
product?

7
What will the
average attention
span be in five
years, and how can
you adjust your
product to optimize
it for consumption?

8
How can the
implementation of
hybrid, modifiable
physical spaces
best enhance user
experiences?

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

METHODOLOGY
Future Today Institute conducts in-depth qualitative and quantitative
research throughout the year to identify emerging trends. We review
patent and trademark filings, pre-print and published scientific papers, investment rounds, online search trends, macroeconomic data,
publications from governments worldwide, news mentions, influencer
posts and other sources, and we use a proprietary system to identify
patterns, which are then grouped into nodes and evaluated using a set
of standardized indicators. Qualified trends are further scored for their
trajectory, momentum and timing. Additionally, we harness the deep
subject matter expertise of our Future Today Institute network, leading
to valuable insights about the topics we cover.
In continuous publication since 2007, Future Today Institute’s annual report includes maturing and emerging trends grouped into two
categories: industry and technology. Industry trends reflect the ways in
which technology is shaping the future of an entire industry. Technology
trends are specific developments within one arena, such as artificial
intelligence. Covering a wide range of technologies across industry
sectors creates a holistic view of change and provides leaders with a
clear understanding of their potential impact. Trends are published as
individual Industry and Technology reports, as well as in one combined
report with all of our research.
Monitored regularly, trends help executives recognize emerging threats
and opportunities in the near-term and enable them to develop perspectives, strategies and plans for the future.

71

Seven-Step Forcasting Funnel

01

Signals
SIGNALS & LONG-TERM TRENDS

What is
INFLUENCING
the future?

02

Trends
03

Uncertainties
GLOBAL MACRO SCENARIOS

What is
THE future?

04

Scenarios
05

Opportunities/Threats
and Rehearsing
STRATEGIC

What is
YOUR ORG’S
future?

06

Planning
07

Actioning

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report

AUTHORS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Amy Webb
Founder and CEO
Annamalai Chockalingam
Senior Expert Advisor

WEB3
Melanie Subin
Managing Director

METAVERSE
Sara M. Watson
Independent Analyst
Marc Palatucci
Senior Expert Advisor

BIOENGINEERING
Amy Webb
Founder and CEO

CLIMATE & ENERGY
Christina von Messling
Senior Foresight Consultant,
Europe Lead

72

MOBILITY, ROBOTICS
& DRONES

GOVERNMENT, POLICY
& SECURITY

Nick Bartlett
Director

Amy Webb
Founder and CEO

COMPUTING

SPACE

Sam Jordan
Foresight Consultant

Ryan Hogan
Foresight Consultant

NEWS & INFORMATION

Sam Jordan
Foresight Consultant

Sam Guzik
Senior Expert Advisor

FINANCIAL SERVICES
Kriffy Perez
Senior Expert Advisor
Melanie Subin
Managing Director

HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
Amy Webb
Founder and CEO

SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
Mark Bryan
Senior Foresight Manager

ENTERTAINMENT
Christina von Messling
Senior Foresight Consultant,
Europe Lead

CONTRIBUTORS
Chief Content Officer
JON FINE
Creative Director
EMILY CAUFIELD
Designer
ERICA GRAU
Contributor
TOM WANG
Editors
CAROLE BRADEN
TOM BRADY
MEGAN CREYDT
TOM FOSTER
Copy Editor
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations
CHERYL COONEY

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

ABOUT
FUTURE TODAY
INSTITUTE
73

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

ABOUT FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE
Founded in 2006, Future Today Institute helps leaders and their
organizations navigate turbulent times by reducing uncertainty,
identifying existential threats, leveraging critical emerging
technologies, and identifying opportunities for growth.
We help organizations lead into the future. Our consultants
work with executives and their teams to define plausible futures
and develop executable strategies. Combining deep industry
knowledge, rich creativity and rigorous analysis, we make
teams confident in taking meaningful action.
As the leading strategic foresight and futures management
consultants to executive leadership teams worldwide, FTI’s
data-driven, applied research methodology identifies trends,
calculates their impact, and through descriptive scenarios,
reveals how they will disrupt business, government and society.
Together with our clients and partners, FTI is helping leaders
achieve their preferred futures. Our pioneering, data-driven
forecasting methodology and tools empower leaders to make
better decisions about the future, today.

74

CONTACT US

For an introductory conversation to learn how Future Today
Institute can assist your organization with its long-term
strategic planning and foresight needs, please contact

inquiries@futuretodayinstitute.com
futuretodayinstitute.com
+1 267 342 4300

SOCIAL
TWITTER

@FTI

LINKEDIN

@Future-Today-Institute

FACEBOOK

@FutureTodayInstitute

INSTAGRAM

@futuretodayinstitute

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

DISCLAIMER
The views expressed herein are the authors’ own and are not representative of the greater organizations in which they have been employed.
The names of companies, services, and products mentioned in this
report are not necessarily intended as endorsements by Future Today
Institute or this report’s authors.
Future Today Institute’s 2023 Tech Trends Report relies on data, analysis,
and modeling from a number of sources, which includes sources within
public and private companies, securities filings, patents, academic
research, government agencies, market research firms, conference presentations and papers, and news media stories. Additionally, this report
draws from Future Today Institute’s previous EMT Trends Reports, FTI
Trend Reports, and newsletters. FTI’s reports are occasionally updated
on the FTI website.
FTI advises hundreds of companies and organizations, some of which
are referenced in this report. FTI does not own any equity position in any
of the entities listed in this presentation.
Any trademarks or service marks used in this report are the marks of
their respective owners, who do not endorse the statements in this
report. All rights in marks are reserved by their respective owners. We
disclaim any and all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to
this report.

75

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

USING AND SHARING THE MATERIAL IN THIS REPORT
You are free to:

You may not:

Download the materials for your or your
organization’s non-commercial use.

Use the materials for any commercial
purposes, which includes: selling, licensing
or charging for products or services that use
the materials.

Use the assets with full attribution to Future
Today Institute using the following language:
“This material is copyrighted by Future Today
Institute and licensed under the Creative
Commons 4.0 International License (CC BYNC-ND 4.0).”
Use assets in a reasonable manner, but not
in any way that suggests that Future Today
Institute endorses you or your use.

Publish the materials in a book or upload to
a website or intranet without prior written
permission from Future Today Institute.
Remix, transform or build upon the material
without giving appropriate credit to Future
Today Institute as the originator of the work
using the following language: “This material
is adapted from original work copyrighted
by Future Today Institute and licensed under
the Creative Commons 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).”
Assert a relationship with or endorsement
from Future Today Institute.

76

© 2023 Future Today Institute

2023

2023 Tech Trends Report Executive Summary

FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE’S 2023 TECH TREND REPORT
Our 2023 edition includes nearly 700 trends, which are published individually in 14 volumes and as one comprehensive report with all trends included.

Download all sections of Future Today Institute’s 2023 Tech Trends report at http://www.futuretodayinstitute.com/trends.

77

© 2023 Future Today Institute

