
PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Marketing’s broader importance extends to society as a whole. Marketing has helped introduce
and gain acceptance of new products that have eased or enriched people’s lives. It can inspire enhancements in existing products as marketers innovate to improve their position in the marketplace. Successful marketing builds demand for products and services, which, in turn, creates jobs.
By contributing to the bottom line, successful marketing also allows firms to more fully engage in
socially responsible activities.2
CEOs recognize the role of marketing in building strong brands and a loyal customer base, intangible assets that contribute heavily to the value of a firm. Consumer goods makers, health care
insurers, nonprofit organizations, and industrial product manufacturers all trumpet their latest
marketing achievements. Many now have a chief marketing officer (CMO) to put marketing on a
more equal footing with other C-level executives such as the chief financial officer (CFO) or chief
information officer (CIO).3
Making the right marketing decisions isn’t always easy. One survey of more than a thousand
senior marketing and sales executives revealed that although 83 percent felt that marketing and
sales capabilities were a top priority for their organization’s success, in rating their actual marketing
effectiveness, only 6 percent felt that they were doing an “extremely good” job.4
Marketers must decide what features to design into a new product or service, what prices to set,
where to sell products or offer services, and how much to spend on advertising, sales, the Internet,
or mobile marketing. They must make those decisions in an Internet-fueled environment where
consumers, competition, technology, and economic forces change rapidly, and the consequences of
the marketer’s words and actions can quickly multiply.

Domino’s When two employees in Conover, North Carolina, posted a YouTube
video showing themselves preparing sandwiches while putting cheese up their noses and violating other health-code standards, Domino’s learned an important lesson about PR and brand
communications in a modern era. Once it found the employees—who claimed the video was
just a gag and the sandwiches were never delivered—the company fired them. In just a few
days, however, there had been more than a million downloads of the video
and a wave of negative publicity. When research showed that perception of
quality for the brand had turned from positive to negative in that short time,
the firm aggressively took action through social media such as Twitter,
YouTube, and others.5

After a distasteful video was
posted online by two employees,
Domino’s Pizza learned a valuable
lesson about the power of social
media.

As Domino’s learned, in an era of connectivity, it is important
to respond swiftly and decisively. While marketers were coming to
grips with this increasingly wired world, the economic recession
of 2008–2009 brought budget cuts and intense pressure from senior management to make every marketing dollar count. More than
ever, marketers need to understand and adapt to the latest marketplace developments. At greatest risk are firms that fail to carefully
monitor their customers and competitors, continuously improve
their value offerings and marketing strategies, or satisfy their
employees, stockholders, suppliers, and channel partners in
the process.
Skillful marketing is a never-ending pursuit. Consider how some top firms drive business:
•

•

•

OfficeMax promoted a new line of products by professional organizer Peter Walsh with Web
videos and in-store events featuring local experts demonstrating his OfficeMax-branded
organizing system.
eBay promoted its “Let’s Make a Daily Deal” holiday promotion by recreating the famous
1970s TV game show Let’s Make a Deal in Times Square, adding an online component so
people outside New York City could play.
Johnson & Johnson launched BabyCenter.com to help new parents. Its success is thought to
have contributed to subscription slumps experienced by parenting magazines.

Good marketers are always seeking new ways to satisfy customers and beat competition.6

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

The Scope of Marketing
To prepare to be a marketer, you need to understand what marketing is, how it works, who does it,
and what is marketed.

What Is Marketing?
Marketing is about identifying and meeting human and social needs. One of the shortest good
definitions of marketing is “meeting needs profitably.” When eBay recognized that people were
unable to locate some of the items they desired most, it created an online auction clearinghouse.
When IKEA noticed that people wanted good furnishings at substantially lower prices, it created
knockdown furniture. These two firms demonstrated marketing savvy and turned a private or
social need into a profitable business opportunity.
The American Marketing Association offers the following formal definition: Marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that
have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large.7 Coping with these exchange processes
calls for a considerable amount of work and skill. Marketing management takes place when at least one
party to a potential exchange thinks about the means of achieving desired responses from other parties.
Thus we see marketing management as the art and science of choosing target markets and getting, keeping, and growing customers through creating, delivering, and communicating superior customer value.
We can distinguish between a social and a managerial definition of marketing. A social definition shows the role marketing plays in society; for example, one marketer has said that marketing’s
role is to “deliver a higher standard of living.” Here is a social definition that serves our purpose:
Marketing is a societal process by which individuals and groups obtain what they need and want
through creating, offering, and freely exchanging products and services of value with others.
Managers sometimes think of marketing as “the art of selling products,” but many people are
surprised when they hear that selling is not the most important part of marketing! Selling is only
the tip of the marketing iceberg. Peter Drucker, a leading management theorist, puts it this way:
There will always, one can assume, be need for some selling. But the aim of marketing is
to make selling superfluous. The aim of marketing is to know and understand the customer so well that the product or service fits him and sells itself. Ideally, marketing should
result in a customer who is ready to buy. All that should be needed then is to make the
product or service available.8
When Nintendo designed its Wii game system, when Canon launched its ELPH digital camera line, and when Toyota introduced its Prius hybrid automobile, these manufacturers
were swamped with orders because they had designed the right product, based on doing careful
marketing homework.

What Is Marketed?
Marketers market 10 main types of entities: goods, services, events, experiences, persons, places,
properties, organizations, information, and ideas. Let’s take a quick look at these categories.

GOODS Physical goods constitute the bulk of most countries’ production and marketing efforts.
Each year, U.S. companies market billions of fresh, canned, bagged, and frozen food products and
millions of cars, refrigerators, televisions, machines, and other mainstays of a modern economy.
SERVICES As economies advance, a growing proportion of their activities focuses on the
production of services. The U.S. economy today produces a 70–30 services-to-goods mix.
Services include the work of airlines, hotels, car rental firms, barbers and beauticians,
maintenance and repair people, and accountants, bankers, lawyers, engineers, doctors, software
programmers, and management consultants. Many market offerings mix goods and services,
such as a fast-food meal.

EVENTS Marketers promote time-based events, such as major trade shows, artistic
performances, and company anniversaries. Global sporting events such as the Olympics and the
World Cup are promoted aggressively to both companies and fans.

| CHAPTER 1

5

6

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

The Rolling Stones have done a
masterful job of marketing their
rebellious form of rock and roll to
audiences of all ages.

EXPERIENCES By orchestrating several services and goods, a firm can create, stage, and market
experiences. Walt Disney World’s Magic Kingdom allows customers to visit a fairy kingdom, a
pirate ship, or a haunted house. There is also a market for customized experiences, such as a week
at a baseball camp with retired baseball greats, a four-day rock and roll fantasy camp, or a climb up
Mount Everest.9
PERSONS Artists, musicians, CEOs, physicians, high-profile lawyers and financiers, and
other professionals all get help from celebrity marketers.10 Some people have done a masterful job
of marketing themselves—David Beckham, Oprah Winfrey, and the Rolling Stones. Management
consultant Tom Peters, a master at self-branding, has advised each person to become a “brand.”
PLACES Cities, states, regions, and whole nations compete to attract tourists, residents, factories, and
company headquarters.11 Place marketers include economic development specialists, real estate agents,
commercial banks, local business associations, and advertising and public relations agencies. The Las
Vegas Convention & Visitors Authority succeeded with its provocative ad campaign, “What Happens
Here, Stays Here,” portraying Las Vegas as “an adult playground.” In the recession of 2008, however,
convention attendance declined. Concerned about its potentially out-of-step racy reputation, the
Authority took out a full-page BusinessWeek ad to defend its ability to host serious business meetings.
Unfortunately, the 2009 summer box office blockbuster The Hangover, set in a debauched Las Vegas,
likely did not help the city position itself as a choice business and tourist destination.12
PROPERTIES Properties are intangible rights of ownership to either real property (real estate) or
financial property (stocks and bonds). They are bought and sold, and these exchanges require
marketing. Real estate agents work for property owners or sellers, or they buy and sell residential or
commercial real estate. Investment companies and banks market securities to both institutional
and individual investors.

ORGANIZATIONS Organizations work to build a strong, favorable, and unique image in the
minds of their target publics. In the United Kingdom, Tesco’s “Every Little Helps” marketing
program reflects the food marketer’s attention to detail in everything it does, within the store and in
the community and environment. The campaign has vaulted Tesco to the top of the UK
supermarket chain industry. Universities, museums, performing arts organizations, corporations,
and nonprofits all use marketing to boost their public images and compete for audiences and funds.
INFORMATION The production, packaging, and distribution of information are major
industries.13 Information is essentially what books, schools, and universities produce, market, and
distribute at a price to parents, students, and communities. The former CEO of Siemens Medical

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

| CHAPTER 1

7

For a city like Las Vegas that
thrives on tourism, good marketing is essential.

Solutions USA, Tom McCausland, says, “[our product] is not necessarily an X-ray or an MRI, but
information. Our business is really health care information technology, and our end product is really
an electronic patient record: information on lab tests, pathology, and drugs as well as voice dictation.”14

IDEAS Every market offering includes a basic idea. Charles Revson of Revlon once observed: “In
the factory we make cosmetics; in the drugstore we sell hope.” Products and services are platforms
for delivering some idea or benefit. Social marketers are busy promoting such ideas as “Friends
Don’t Let Friends Drive Drunk” and “A Mind Is a Terrible Thing to Waste.”

Who Markets?
MARKETERS AND PROSPECTS A marketer is someone who seeks a response—attention, a
purchase, a vote, a donation—from another party, called the prospect. If two parties are seeking to
sell something to each other, we call them both marketers.

One of the most important areas of
marketing is the work that social
marketers do to promote socially
desirable behaviors.

8

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Marketers are skilled at stimulating demand for their products, but that’s a limited view of what
they do. Just as production and logistics professionals are responsible for supply management, marketers are responsible for demand management. They seek to influence the level, timing, and composition of demand to meet the organization’s objectives. Eight demand states are possible:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Negative demand—Consumers dislike the product and may even pay to avoid it.
Nonexistent demand—Consumers may be unaware of or uninterested in the product.
Latent demand—Consumers may share a strong need that cannot be satisfied by an existing
product.
Declining demand—Consumers begin to buy the product less frequently or not at all.
Irregular demand—Consumer purchases vary on a seasonal, monthly, weekly, daily, or even
hourly basis.
Full demand—Consumers are adequately buying all products put into the marketplace.
Overfull demand—More consumers would like to buy the product than can be satisfied.
Unwholesome demand—Consumers may be attracted to products that have undesirable social consequences.

In each case, marketers must identify the underlying cause(s) of the demand state and determine a plan of action to shift demand to a more desired state.

MARKETS Traditionally, a “market” was a physical place where buyers and sellers gathered to buy
and sell goods. Economists describe a market as a collection of buyers and sellers who transact over
a particular product or product class (such as the housing market or the grain market).
Five basic markets and their connecting flows are shown in
Figure 1.1. Manufacturers go to
resource markets (raw material markets, labor markets, money markets), buy resources and turn
them into goods and services, and sell finished products to intermediaries, who sell them to consumers. Consumers sell their labor and receive money with which they pay for goods and services.
The government collects tax revenues to buy goods from resource, manufacturer, and intermediary
markets and uses these goods and services to provide public services. Each nation’s economy, and
the global economy, consists of interacting sets of markets linked through exchange processes.
Marketers use the term market to cover various groupings of customers. They view sellers as
constituting the industry and buyers as constituting the market. They talk about need markets (the
diet-seeking market), product markets (the shoe market), demographic markets (the youth market), and geographic markets (the Chinese market); or they extend the concept to cover voter markets, labor markets, and donor markets, for instance.
Figure 1.2 shows the relationship between the industry and the market. Sellers and buyers
are connected by four flows. Sellers send goods and services and communications such as ads and
direct mail to the market; in return they receive money and information such as customer attitudes
and sales data. The inner loop shows an exchange of money for goods and services; the outer loop
shows an exchange of information.

|Fig. 1.1|

Resources

Resources
Resource
markets

Money

Structure of Flows
in a Modern Exchange
Economy

Taxes,
goods

Money

Services,
money

Services,
money
Manufacturer
markets

Taxes
Government
markets

Taxes, goods

Services
Services,
money

Taxes,
goods
Money

Money
Goods and services

Consumer
markets

Intermediary
markets

Goods and services

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

Communication

|Fig. 1.2|

Goods/services
Market
(a collection of buyers)

Industry
(a collection of sellers)

| CHAPTER 1

Money

Information

KEY CUSTOMER MARKETS Consider the following key customer markets: consumer,
business, global, and nonprofit.

Consumer Markets Companies selling mass consumer goods and services such as juices,
cosmetics, athletic shoes, and air travel spend a great deal of time establishing a strong brand image
by developing a superior product and packaging, ensuring its availability, and backing it with
engaging communications and reliable service.

Business Markets Companies selling business goods and services often face well-informed
professional buyers skilled at evaluating competitive offerings. Business buyers buy goods to make
or resell a product to others at a profit. Business marketers must demonstrate how their products
will help achieve higher revenue or lower costs. Advertising can play a role, but the sales force, the
price, and the company’s reputation may play a greater one.

Global Markets Companies in the global marketplace must decide which countries to enter;
how to enter each (as an exporter, licenser, joint venture partner, contract manufacturer, or solo
manufacturer); how to adapt product and service features to each country; how to price products
in different countries; and how to design communications for different cultures. They face different
requirements for buying and disposing of property; cultural, language, legal and political
differences; and currency fluctuations. Yet, the payoff can be huge.
Nonprofit and Governmental Markets Companies selling to nonprofit organizations with
limited purchasing power such as churches, universities, charitable organizations, and government
agencies need to price carefully. Lower selling prices affect the features and quality the seller can
build into the offering. Much government purchasing calls for bids, and buyers often focus on
practical solutions and favor the lowest bid in the absence of extenuating factors.15
MARKETPLACES, MARKETSPACES, AND METAMARKETS The marketplace is physical,
such as a store you shop in; the marketspace is digital, as when you shop on the Internet.16
Northwestern University’s Mohan Sawhney has proposed the concept of a metamarket to describe a
cluster of complementary products and services closely related in the minds of consumers, but
spread across a diverse set of industries.
Metamarkets are the result of marketers packaging a system that simplifies carrying out these
related product/service activities. The automobile metamarket consists of automobile manufacturers,
new and used car dealers, financing companies, insurance companies, mechanics, spare parts dealers,
service shops, auto magazines, classified auto ads in newspapers, and auto sites on the Internet.
A car buyer will engage many parts of this metamarket, creating an opportunity for metamediaries
to assist him or her in moving seamlessly through them. Edmund’s (www.edmunds.com) lets a car
buyer find the stated features and prices of different automobiles and easily click to other sites to
search for the lowest-price dealer for financing, accessories, and used cars. Metamediaries also serve
other metamarkets, such as home ownership, parenting and baby care, and weddings.17

Core Marketing Concepts
To understand the marketing function, we need to understand the following core set of concepts.

Needs, Wants, and Demands
Needs are the basic human requirements such as for air, food, water, clothing, and shelter. Humans
also have strong needs for recreation, education, and entertainment. These needs become wants

A Simple Marketing
System

9

10

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

when they are directed to specific objects that might satisfy the need. A U.S. consumer needs food
but may want a Philly cheesesteak and an iced tea. A person in Afghanistan needs food but may
want rice, lamb, and carrots. Wants are shaped by our society.
Demands are wants for specific products backed by an ability to pay. Many people want a
Mercedes; only a few are able to buy one. Companies must measure not only how many people
want their product, but also how many are willing and able to buy it.
These distinctions shed light on the frequent criticism that “marketers create needs” or “marketers get people to buy things they don’t want.” Marketers do not create needs: Needs preexist
marketers. Marketers, along with other societal factors, influence wants. They might promote the
idea that a Mercedes would satisfy a person’s need for social status. They do not, however, create the
need for social status.
Some customers have needs of which they are not fully conscious or that they cannot articulate.
What does it mean when the customer asks for a “powerful” lawn mower or a “peaceful” hotel? The
marketer must probe further. We can distinguish five types of needs:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Stated needs (The customer wants an inexpensive car.)
Real needs (The customer wants a car whose operating cost, not initial price, is low.)
Unstated needs (The customer expects good service from the dealer.)
Delight needs (The customer would like the dealer to include an onboard GPS navigation system.)
Secret needs (The customer wants friends to see him or her as a savvy consumer.)

Responding only to the stated need may shortchange the customer.18 Consumers did not know
much about cellular phones when they were first introduced, and Nokia and Ericsson fought to
shape consumer perceptions of them. To gain an edge, companies must help customers learn what
they want.

Target Markets, Positioning, and Segmentation
Not everyone likes the same cereal, restaurant, college, or movie. Therefore, marketers start by dividing the market into segments. They identify and profile distinct groups of buyers who might
prefer or require varying product and service mixes by examining demographic, psychographic,
and behavioral differences among buyers.
After identifying market segments, the marketer decides which present the greatest opportunities—
which are its target markets. For each, the firm develops a market offering that it positions in the minds
of the target buyers as delivering some central benefit(s). Volvo develops its cars for buyers to whom
safety is a major concern, positioning its vehicles as the safest a customer can buy.

Offerings and Brands
Companies address customer needs by putting forth a value proposition, a set of benefits that satisfy those needs. The intangible value proposition is made physical by an offering, which can be a
combination of products, services, information, and experiences.
A brand is an offering from a known source. A brand name such as McDonald’s carries many
associations in people’s minds that make up its image: hamburgers, cleanliness, convenience, courteous service, and golden arches. All companies strive to build a brand image with as many strong,
favorable, and unique brand associations as possible.

Value and Satisfaction
The buyer chooses the offerings he or she perceives to deliver the most value, the sum of the
tangible and intangible benefits and costs to her. Value, a central marketing concept, is primarily a
combination of quality, service, and price (qsp), called the customer value triad. Value perceptions
increase with quality and service but decrease with price.
We can think of marketing as the identification, creation, communication, delivery, and
monitoring of customer value. Satisfaction reflects a person’s judgment of a product’s perceived
performance in relationship to expectations. If the performance falls short of expectations, the customer is disappointed. If it matches expectations, the customer is satisfied. If it exceeds them, the
customer is delighted.

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

Marketing Channels
To reach a target market, the marketer uses three kinds of marketing channels. Communication
channels deliver and receive messages from target buyers and include newspapers, magazines, radio,
television, mail, telephone, billboards, posters, fliers, CDs, audiotapes, and the Internet. Beyond
these, firms communicate through the look of their retail stores and Web sites and other media.
Marketers are increasingly adding dialogue channels such as e-mail, blogs, and toll-free numbers to
familiar monologue channels such as ads.
The marketer uses distribution channels to display, sell, or deliver the physical product or
service(s) to the buyer or user. These channels may be direct via the Internet, mail, or mobile phone
or telephone, or indirect with distributors, wholesalers, retailers, and agents as intermediaries.
To carry out transactions with potential buyers, the marketer also uses service channels that include warehouses, transportation companies, banks, and insurance companies. Marketers clearly
face a design challenge in choosing the best mix of communication, distribution, and service channels for their offerings.

Supply Chain
The supply chain is a longer channel stretching from raw materials to components to finished
products carried to final buyers. The supply chain for coffee may start with Ethiopian farmers who
plant, tend, and pick the coffee beans, selling their harvest to wholesalers or perhaps a Fair Trade
cooperative. If sold through the cooperative, the coffee is washed, dried, and packaged for shipment
by an Alternative Trading Organization (ATO) that pays a minimum of $1.26 a pound. The ATO
transports the coffee to the developing world where it can sell it directly or via retail channels. Each
company captures only a certain percentage of the total value generated by the supply chain’s value
delivery system. When a company acquires competitors or expands upstream or downstream, its
aim is to capture a higher percentage of supply chain value.

Competition
Competition includes all the actual and potential rival offerings and substitutes a buyer might consider. An automobile manufacturer can buy steel from U.S. Steel in the United States, from a foreign
firm in Japan or Korea, or from a minimill such as Nucor at a cost savings, or it can buy aluminum
for certain parts from Alcoa to reduce the car’s weight, or engineered plastics from Saudi Basic
Industries Corporation (SABIC) instead of steel. Clearly, U.S. Steel would be thinking too narrowly
about its competition if it thought only of other integrated steel companies. In the long run, U.S.
Steel is more likely to be hurt by substitute products than by other steel companies.

Marketing Environment

TerraCycle

The marketing environment consists of the task environment and the broad environment. The task
environment includes the actors engaged in producing, distributing, and promoting the offering.
These are the company, suppliers, distributors, dealers, and target customers. In the supplier group
are material suppliers and service suppliers, such as marketing research agencies, advertising agencies, banking and insurance companies, transportation companies, and telecommunications companies. Distributors and dealers include agents, brokers, manufacturer representatives, and others
who facilitate finding and selling to customers.
The broad environment consists of six components: demographic environment, economic environment, social-cultural environment, natural environment, technological environment, and political-legal environment. Marketers must pay close attention to the trends and developments in
these and adjust their marketing strategies as needed. New opportunities are constantly emerging
that await the right marketing savvy and ingenuity. Here are two good examples.

TerraCycle After finding that some of his friend’s indoor herbal plants flourished
with a fertilizer made by feeding table scraps to red wiggler worms in a composting bin,
TerraCycle founder Tom Szaky came up with an idea for a business. TerraCycle is devoted to “upcycling,” finding new ways to use nonrecyclable waste materials. Plastic bags become sturdy

| CHAPTER 1

11

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

totes, yogurt cups become plant holders, and cookie wrappers become notebook covers, all distributed by
major retailers such as Home Depot, Whole Foods, and Walmart. The firm also has partnerships with Kraft,
Target, Honest Tea, Stonyfield Farms, and others. Schools, churches, wineries, and nonprofits provide space
to store donated used bottles, corks, and candy wrappers. For each item collected, TerraCycle makes a donation to a charity (typically 2 cents).19

Allrecipes.com

12

Allrecipes.com Allrecipes.com has cooked up a winning online formula by

blending recipes posted by individuals with those provided by corporations promoting their own
products like Kraft cheese or Campbell’s Soup. After almost a 50 percent increase in site visits
and unique visitors in 2009, the Web site overtook the Food Network’s recipe site as the market
leader. With tens of thousands of posted recipes, it thrives on people’s willingness to share
recipes and the satisfaction they feel if their recipe becomes popular with others. The viral nature of the site’s
success is obvious—it doesn’t spend any money on advertising! Users tend to think of it as “their” site—not
something with a big company behind it.20

The New Marketing Realities
We can say with some confidence that the marketplace isn’t what it used to be. It is dramatically different from what it was even 10 years ago.

Major Societal Forces
Today, major, and sometimes interlinking, societal forces have created new marketing behaviors,
opportunities, and challenges. Here are 12 key ones.
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Network information technology. The digital revolution has created an Information Age that
promises to lead to more accurate levels of production, more targeted communications, and
more relevant pricing.
Globalization. Technological advances in transportation, shipping, and communication have
made it easier for companies to market in, and consumers to buy from, almost any country in
the world. International travel has continued to grow as more people work and play in other
countries.
Deregulation. Many countries have deregulated industries to create greater competition
and growth opportunities. In the United States, laws restricting financial services,
telecommunications, and electric utilities have all been loosened in the spirit of greater
competition.
Privatization. Many countries have converted public companies to private ownership and
management to increase their efficiency, such as the massive telecom company Telefónica CTC
in Chile and the international airline British Airways in the United Kingdom.
Heightened competition. Intense competition among domestic and foreign brands raises
marketing costs and shrinks profit margins. Brand manufacturers are further buffeted by powerful retailers that market their own store brands. Many strong brands have become
megabrands and extended into a wide variety of related product categories, presenting a significant competitive threat.
Industry convergence. Industry boundaries are blurring as companies recognize new
opportunities at the intersection of two or more industries. The computing and consumer
electronics industries are converging, for example, as Apple, Sony, and Samsung release a
stream of entertainment devices from MP3 players to plasma TVs and camcorders. Digital
technology fuels this massive convergence.21
Retail transformation. Store-based retailers face competition from catalog houses; directmail firms; newspaper, magazine, and TV direct-to-customer ads; home shopping TV;
and e-commerce. In response, entrepreneurial retailers are building entertainment into

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

| CHAPTER 1

13

Modern retailers increasingly
emphasize in-store experiences for
their customers, as does Dick’s
Sporting Goods.

•

•

•

•

•

their stores with coffee bars, demonstrations, and performances, marketing an “experience”
rather than a product assortment. Dick’s Sporting Goods has grown from a single bait-andtackle store in Binghamton, New York, into a 300-store sporting goods retailer in 30 states.
Part of its success springs from the interactive features of its stores. Customers can test golf
clubs in indoor ranges, sample shoes on its footwear track, and shoot bows in its archery
range.22
Disintermediation. The amazing success of early dot-coms such as AOL, Amazon.com,
Yahoo!, eBay, E*TRADE, and others created disintermediation in the delivery of products
and services by intervening in the traditional flow of goods through distribution channels.
These firms struck terror into the hearts of established manufacturers and retailers. In response, traditional companies engaged in reintermediation and became “brick-and-click”
retailers, adding online services to their offerings. Some became stronger contenders than
pure-click firms, because they had a larger pool of resources to work with and established
brand names.
Consumer buying power. In part, due to disintermediation via the Internet, consumers have
substantially increased their buying power. From the home, office, or mobile phone, they can
compare product prices and features and order goods online from anywhere in the world
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, bypassing limited local offerings and realizing significant price
savings. Even business buyers can run a reverse auction in which sellers compete to capture
their business. They can readily join others to aggregate their purchases and achieve deeper
volume discounts.
Consumer information. Consumers can collect information in as much breadth and
depth as they want about practically anything. They can access online encyclopedias, dictionaries, medical information, movie ratings, consumer reports, newspapers, and other
information sources in many languages from anywhere in the world. Personal connections
and user-generated content thrive on social media such as Facebook, Flickr (photos),
Del.icio.us (links), Digg (news stories), Wikipedia (encyclopedia articles), and YouTube
(video).23 Social networking sites—such as Dogster for dog lovers, TripAdvisor for ardent
travelers, and Moterus for bikers—bring together consumers with a common interest. At
CarSpace.com auto enthusiasts talk about chrome rims, the latest BMW model, and where
to find a great local mechanic.24
Consumer participation. Consumers have found an amplified voice to influence peer
and public opinion. In recognition, companies are inviting them to participate in designing
and even marketing offerings to heighten their sense of connection and ownership.
Consumers see their favorite companies as workshops from which they can draw out the
offerings they want.
Consumer resistance. Many customers today feel there are fewer real product differences,
so they show less brand loyalty and become more price- and quality-sensitive in their
search for value, and less tolerant about undesired marketing. A Yankelovich study

14

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

found record levels of marketing resistance from consumers; a majority reported negative
opinions about marketing and advertising and said they avoid products they feel are overmarketed.25

New Company Capabilities
These major societal forces create complex challenges for marketers, but they have also generated a
new set of capabilities to help companies cope and respond.
•

•

•

•

Sammy Stephen’s viral video
helped his flea market receive
unprecedented attention.

Marketers can use the Internet as a powerful information and sales channel. The
Internet augments marketers’ geographical reach to inform customers and promote products worldwide. A Web site can list products and services, history, business philosophy, job
opportunities, and other information of interest. In 2006, a Montgomery, Alabama, flea
market gained national popularity when owner Sammy Stephens’s rap-style advertisement
spread virally through the Internet. Created for $1,500, the advertisement was viewed more
than 100,000 times on YouTube and landed Stephens on The Ellen DeGeneres Show.
Stephens now sells T-shirts, ring tones, and other branded merchandise through his Web
site, advises retailers about advertising, and hosts hundreds of visitors from all over the
world at his store each month.26
Marketers can collect fuller and richer information about markets, customers, prospects,
and competitors. Marketers can conduct fresh marketing research by using the Internet to
arrange focus groups, send out questionnaires, and gather primary data in several other ways.
They can assemble information about individual customers’ purchases, preferences, demographics, and profitability. The drugstore chain CVS uses loyalty-card data to better understand what consumers purchase, the frequency of store visits, and other buying preferences. Its
ExtraCare program netted an extra 30 million shoppers and $12 billion a year in revenue
across 4,000 stores.27
Marketers can tap into social media to amplify their brand message. Marketers can feed information and updates to consumers via blogs and other postings, support online communities, and create their own stops on the Internet superhighway. Dell Corporation’s
@DellOutlet Twitter account has more than 600,000 followers. Between 2007 and June 2009,
Dell took in more than $2 million in revenue from coupons provided through Twitter, and
another $1 million from people who started at Twitter and went on to buy a new computer
on the company’s Web site.28
Marketers can facilitate and speed external communication among customers. Marketers
can also create or benefit from online and offline “buzz” through brand advocates and user

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

•

•

•

•

•

•

communities. Word-of-mouth marketing agency BzzAgent has assembled a nationwide
volunteer army of 600,000 consumers who join promotional programs for products and
services they deem worth talking about.29 In 2005, Dunkin’ Donuts hired BzzAgent to help
launch a new espresso beverage, Latte Lite. Three thousand trained volunteers (called
BzzAgents) in 12 test markets experienced the Latte Lite, formed their opinions, engaged in
natural conversations about the product, and reported back to BzzAgent via the company’s
reporting interface. After four weeks, product sales had increased by more than 15 percent
in test markets.30
Marketers can send ads, coupons, samples, and information to customers who have requested them or given the company permission to send them. Micro-target marketing and
two-way communication are easier thanks to the proliferation of special-interest magazines,
TV channels, and Internet newsgroups. Extranets linking suppliers and distributors let firms
send and receive information, place orders, and make payments more efficiently. The company can also interact with each customer individually to personalize messages, services, and
the relationship.
Marketers can reach consumers on the move with mobile marketing. Using GPS technology, marketers can pinpoint consumers’ exact location and send them messages at the mall
with coupons good only that day, a reminder of an item on their wish list, and a relevant
perk (buy this book today and get a free coffee at the bookstore’s coffee shop). Locationbased advertising is attractive because it reaches consumers closer to the point of sale. Firms
can also advertise on video iPods and reach consumers on their cell phones through mobile marketing.31
Companies can make and sell individually differentiated goods. Thanks to advances in factory customization, computer technology, and database marketing software, customers can
buy M&M candies, TABASCO jugs, or Maker’s Mark bottles with their names on them;
Wheaties boxes or Jones soda cans with their picture on the front; and Heinz ketchup bottles
with customized messages.32 BMW’s technology allows buyers to design their own car models
from among 350 variations, with 500 options, 90 exterior colors, and 170 trims. The company
claims that 80 percent of the cars bought in Europe and up to 30 percent bought in the United
States are built to order.
Companies can improve purchasing, recruiting, training, and internal and external
communications. Firms can recruit new employees online, and many have Internet training
products for their employees, dealers, and agents. Retailer Patagonia has joined Walt Disney,
General Motors, and McDonald’s in embracing corporate blogging to communicate with the public and employees. Patagonia’s The Cleanest Line posts environmental news, reports the results of its sponsored athletes, and posts pictures and
descriptions of employees’ favorite outdoor locations.33
Companies can facilitate and speed up internal communication among
their employees by using the Internet as a private intranet. Employees can
query one another, seek advice, and download or upload needed information
from and to the company’s main computer. Seeking a single online employee
portal that transcended business units, General Motors launched a platform
called mySocrates in 2006 consisting of announcements, news, links, and
historical information. GM credits the portal with $17.4 million in cost
savings to date.34
Companies can improve their cost efficiency by skillful use of the
Internet. Corporate buyers can achieve substantial savings by using the
Internet to compare sellers’ prices and purchase materials at auction, or by
posting their own terms in reverse auctions. Companies can improve logistics
and operations to reap substantial cost savings while improving accuracy and
service quality.

Marketing in Practice
Not surprisingly, these new marketing forces and capabilities have profoundly
changed marketing management. In theory, the marketing planning process consists
of analyzing marketing opportunities, selecting target markets, designing marketing
strategies, developing marketing programs, and managing the marketing effort.

| CHAPTER 1

15

Companies are increasingly allowing customers to customize their
products, such as with personalized
messages on the front labels of
Heinz ketchup bottles.

16

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

In practice, however, in the highly competitive marketplaces that are more often the norm,
marketing planning is more fluid and is continually refreshed.
Companies must always be moving forward with marketing programs, innovating products and
services, staying in touch with customer needs, and seeking new advantages rather than relying on
past strengths. This is especially true of incorporating the Internet into marketing plans. Marketers
must try to balance increased spending on search advertising, social media, direct e-mail, and
text/SMS marketing efforts with appropriate spending on traditional marketing communications.
But they must do so in tough economic times, when accountability has become a top priority and
returns on investment are expected from every marketing activity. “Marketing Insight: Marketing
in an Age of Turbulence” offers some recommendations for adjusting to new marketing realities.

4.

Marketing Insight
Marketing in an Age
of Turbulence
The severe economic recession of 2008–2009 caused marketers to rethink best practices of management. Philip Kotler and John Caslione
see management entering a new Age of Turbulence in which chaos,
risk, and uncertainty characterize many industries, markets, and companies. According to them, turbulence is the new normal, punctuated by
periodic and intermittent spurts of prosperity and downturn—including
extended downturns amounting to recession, or even depression. They
see many new challenges in the foreseeable future, and unlike past recessions, there may be no assurance that a return to past management
practices would ever be successful again.
According to Kotler and Caslione, marketers should always be
ready to activate automatic responses when turbulence whips up and
chaos reigns in. They recommend marketers keep these eight factors in
mind as they create “chaotics marketing strategies.”
1. Secure your market share from core customer segments. This
is not a time to get greedy, so get your core customer segments
firmly secured, and be prepared to ward off attacks from competitors seeking your most profitable and loyal customers.
2. Push aggressively for greater market share from competitors. All
companies fight for market share, and in turbulent and chaotic times,
many have been weakened. Slashing marketing budgets and sales
travel expenses is a sure sign a competitor is buckling under pressure. Push aggressively to add to your core customer segments at the
expense of your weakened competitors.
3. Research customers more now, because their needs and
wants are in flux. Everyone is under pressure during times of turbulence and chaos, and all customers—even those in your core
segments whom you know so well—are changing. Stay close to

5.

6.

7.

8.

them as never before. Research them more than ever. Don’t find
yourself using old, tried-and-true marketing messages that no
longer resonate with them.
Minimally maintain, but seek to increase, your marketing
budget. With your competitors aggressively marketing to your
core customers, this is the worst time to think about cutting anything in your marketing budget that targets them. In fact, you need
to add to it, or take money away from forays into totally new customer segments. It’s time to secure the home front.
Focus on all that’s safe and emphasize core values. When turbulence is scaring everyone in the market, most customers flee to
higher ground. They need to feel the safety and security of your
company and your products and services. Do everything possible
to tell them that continuing to do business with you is safe, and to
sell them products and services that keep making them feel safe.
Drop programs that aren’t working for you quickly. Your marketing budgets will always be scrutinized, in good times and bad
times. If anyone is to cut one of your programs, let it be you, before
anyone else spots any ineffective ones. If you’re not watching, rest
assured someone else is, including your peers whose budgets
couldn’t be protected from the axe.
Don’t discount your best brands. Discounting your established
and most successful brands tells the market two things: your
prices were too high before, and your products won’t be worth the
price in the future once the discounts are gone. If you want to appeal to more frugal customers, create a new brand with lower
prices. This lets value-conscious customers stay close to you, without alienating those still willing to pay for your higher-priced
brands. Once the turbulence subsides, you may consider discontinuing the value product line—or not.

Save the strong; lose the weak. In turbulent markets, your
strongest brands and products must become even stronger. There’s
no time or money to be wasted on marginal brands or products that
lack strong value propositions and a solid customer base. Appeal to
safety and value to reinforce strong brands and product and service
offerings. Remember, your brands can never be strong enough, especially against the waves of a turbulent economy.

Source: Based on Philip Kotler and John A. Caslione, Chaotics: The Business and
Marketing in the Age of Turbulence (New York: AMACOM, 2009) pp. 151–153.

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

THE NEW CMO The rapidly changing marketing environment is putting even greater
demands on marketing executives. A well-publicized survey revealed that the average CMO tenure
at U.S. companies is about 28 months, well below the average tenure of CEOs (54 months) or other
C-level positions. One explanation is that the role of marketing—and thus management
expectations—varies widely among firms. Harvard’s Gail McGovern and John Quelch find
tremendous variability in CMO responsibilities and job descriptions.35
Another challenge CMOs face is that the success factors for top marketers are many and varied.
CMOs must have strong quantitative skills but also well-honed qualitative skills; they must have an
independent, entrepreneurial attitude but also work in close harmony with other departments such
as sales; and they must capture the “voice” and point of view of consumers yet have a keen bottomline understanding of how marketing creates value within their organization.36 One survey asked
200 senior-level marketing executives which innate and learned qualities were most important;
here are their answers:37
•

Innate Qualities
•
Risk taker
•
Willingness to make decisions
•
Problem-solving ability
•
Change agent
•
Results-oriented

•

Learned Qualities
•
Global experience
•
Multichannel expertise
•
Cross-industry experience
•
Digital focus
•
Operational knowledge

Perhaps the most important role for any CMO is to infuse a customer perspective and orientation in business decisions affecting any customer touch point (where a customer directly or indirectly interacts with the company in some form). The CMO of lodging franchisor Choice Hotels
International, Chris Malone, is responsible for directing virtually all customer-facing efforts for the
firm, including:38
•
•
•

Advertising, loyalty programs, and direct response;
Guiding the company’s central reservations systems, including its call centers, Web site, and
relationships with outside travel vendors such as Travelocity and Orbitz; and
Heading up the company’s global group sales efforts with organizations such as AAA, AARP,
and professional sports teams.

MARKETING IN THE ORGANIZATION Although an effective CMO is crucial,
increasingly marketing is not done only by the marketing department. Because marketing must
affect every aspect of the customer experience, marketers must properly manage all possible touch
points—store layouts, package designs, product functions, employee training, and shipping and
logistics methods. Marketing must also be influential in key general management activities, such as
product innovation and new-business development. To create a strong marketing organization,
marketers must think like executives in other departments, and executives in other departments
must think more like marketers.39
As the late David Packard of Hewlett-Packard observed, “Marketing is far too important to leave
to the marketing department.” Companies now know that every employee has an impact on the
customer and must see the customer as the source of the company’s prosperity. So they’re beginning to emphasize interdepartmental teamwork to manage key processes. They’re emphasizing the
smooth management of core business processes, such as new-product realization, customer acquisition and retention, and order fulfillment.

Company Orientation Toward
the Marketplace
Given these new marketing realities, what philosophy should guide a company’s marketing efforts?
Increasingly, marketers operate consistent with the holistic marketing concept. Let’s first review the
evolution of earlier marketing ideas.

| CHAPTER 1

17

18

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

The Production Concept
The production concept is one of the oldest concepts in business. It holds that consumers prefer
products that are widely available and inexpensive. Managers of production-oriented businesses
concentrate on achieving high production efficiency, low costs, and mass distribution. This orientation makes sense in developing countries such as China, where the largest PC manufacturer,
Legend (principal owner of Lenovo Group), and domestic appliances giant Haier take advantage of
the country’s huge and inexpensive labor pool to dominate the market. Marketers also use the production concept when they want to expand the market.40

The Product Concept
The product concept proposes that consumers favor products offering the most quality,
performance, or innovative features. However, managers are sometimes caught in a love affair with
their products. They might commit the “better-mousetrap” fallacy, believing a better product will
by itself lead people to beat a path to their door. A new or improved product will not necessarily be
successful unless it’s priced, distributed, advertised, and sold properly.

The Selling Concept
The selling concept holds that consumers and businesses, if left alone, won’t buy enough of
the organization’s products. It is practiced most aggressively with unsought goods—goods
buyers don’t normally think of buying such as insurance and cemetery plots—and when firms
with overcapacity aim to sell what they make, rather than make what the market wants.
Marketing based on hard selling is risky. It assumes customers coaxed into buying a product
not only won’t return or bad-mouth it or complain to consumer organizations but might even
buy it again.

The Marketing Concept
The marketing concept emerged in the mid-1950s41 as a customer-centered, sense-and-respond
philosophy. The job is to find not the right customers for your products, but the right products
for your customers. Dell doesn’t prepare a perfect computer for its target market. Rather, it provides product platforms on which each person customizes the features he or she desires in the
computer.
The marketing concept holds that the key to achieving organizational goals is being more effective than competitors in creating, delivering, and communicating superior customer value to your
target markets. Harvard’s Theodore Levitt drew a perceptive contrast between the selling and
marketing concepts:
Selling focuses on the needs of the seller; marketing on the needs of the buyer. Selling is
preoccupied with the seller’s need to convert his product into cash; marketing with the
idea of satisfying the needs of the customer by means of the product and the whole cluster of things associated with creating, delivering, and finally consuming it.42
Several scholars found that companies embracing the marketing concept at that time achieved
superior performance.43

The Holistic Marketing Concept
Without question, the trends and forces that have defined the first decade of the 21st century
are leading business firms to a new set of beliefs and practices. “Marketing Memo: Marketing
Right and Wrong” suggests where companies go wrong—and how they can get it right—in
their marketing.
The holistic marketing concept is based on the development, design, and implementation of
marketing programs, processes, and activities that recognize their breadth and interdependencies.
Holistic marketing acknowledges that everything matters in marketing—and that a broad, integrated perspective is often necessary.

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

| CHAPTER 1

Holistic marketing thus recognizes and reconciles the scope and complexities of marketing activities.
Figure 1.3 provides a schematic overview of four broad components characterizing
holistic marketing: relationship marketing, integrated marketing, internal marketing, and performance marketing. We’ll examine these major themes throughout this book. Successful companies keep their marketing changing with the changes in their marketplace—and marketspace.

Marketing
department

Senior
management

Products &
services

Other
departments

Communications

Internal
marketing

|Fig. 1.3|
Channels

Holistic Marketing
Dimensions

Integrated
marketing

Holistic
marketing

Sales revenue

Relationship
marketing

Performance
marketing

Brand &
customer equity
Ethics
Community
Environment Legal

marketing

Memo

Customers

Partners
Channel

Marketing Right and Wrong

The Ten Deadly Sins of Marketing

The Ten Commandments of Marketing

1. The company is not sufficiently market
focused and customer driven.
2. The company does not fully understand
its target customers.
3. The company needs to better define
and monitor its competitors.
4. The company has not properly managed
its relationships with its stakeholders.
5. The company is not good at finding
new opportunities.
6. The company’s marketing plans and planning
process are deficient.
7. The company’s product and service policies
need tightening.
8. The company’s brand-building and
communications skills are weak.
9. The company is not well organized to carry
on effective and efficient marketing.
10. The company has not made maximum use
of technology.

1. The company segments the market, chooses the best segments, and develops
a strong position in each chosen segment.
2. The company maps its customers’ needs, perceptions, preferences, and behavior
and motivates its stakeholders to obsess about serving and satisfying the customers.
3. The company knows its major competitors and their strengths and weaknesses.
4. The company builds partners out of its stakeholders and generously
rewards them.
5. The company develops systems for identifying opportunities, ranking them,
and choosing the best ones.
6. The company manages a marketing planning system that leads to insightful
long-term and short-term plans.
7. The company exercises strong control over its product and service mix.
8. The company builds strong brands by using the most cost-effective
communication and promotion tools.
9. The company builds marketing leadership and a team spirit among its various
departments.
10. The company constantly adds technology that gives it a competitive advantage
in the marketplace.

Source: Adapted from Philip Kotler, Ten Deadly Marketing Sins (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004) pp. 10, 145–148.

19

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Relationship Marketing
Increasingly, a key goal of marketing is to develop deep, enduring relationships with people and organizations that directly or indirectly affect the success of the firm’s marketing activities.
Relationship marketing aims to build mutually satisfying long-term relationships with key constituents in order to earn and retain their business.44
Four key constituents for relationship marketing are customers, employees, marketing partners
(channels, suppliers, distributors, dealers, agencies), and members of the financial community
(shareholders, investors, analysts). Marketers must create prosperity among all these constituents
and balance the returns to all key stakeholders. To develop strong relationships with them requires
understanding their capabilities and resources, needs, goals, and desires.
The ultimate outcome of relationship marketing is a unique company asset called a marketing
network, consisting of the company and its supporting stakeholders—customers, employees, suppliers, distributors, retailers, and others—with whom it has built mutually profitable business relationships. The operating principle is simple: build an effective network of relationships with key
stakeholders, and profits will follow.45 Thus more companies are choosing to own brands rather
than physical assets and are subcontracting activities to firms that can do them better and more
cheaply, while retaining core activities at home.
Companies are also shaping separate offers, services, and messages to individual customers,
based on information about past transactions, demographics, psychographics, and media and
distribution preferences. By focusing on their most profitable customers, products, and channels,
these firms hope to achieve profitable growth, capturing a larger share of each customer’s expenditures by building high customer loyalty. They estimate individual customer lifetime value and
design their market offerings and prices to make a profit over the customer’s lifetime.
These activities fall under what Columbia Business School professor Larry Selden and his wife
and business consulting partner, Yoko Sugiura Selden, call “customer centricity.” The Seldens offer
the Royal Bank of Canada as an example.

Royal Bank of Canada

Thinking of its business in terms of customer
segments rather than product segments, Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) has put each of its
roughly 11 million clients into meaningful segments whose profitability it can measure. In the
process, it discovered a sizable subsegment of customers hidden within its broader categories
of “wealth preservers” and “wealth accumulators.” Dubbed “snowbirds,” these individuals
spent a number of months each winter in Florida, where they were experiencing difficulties establishing
credit as well as missing their Canadian communities, particularly the familiarity of the French-Canadian
accent and fluency in French. To meet their unique needs, RBC created a Canadian banking experience in
Florida.46
Royal Bank
of Canada

20

Because attracting a new customer may cost five times as much as retaining an existing one,
relationship marketing also emphasizes customer retention. Companies build customer share by
offering a larger variety of goods to existing customers, training employees in cross-selling and upselling. Marketing must skillfully conduct not only customer relationship management (CRM), but
partner relationship management (PRM) as well. Companies are deepening their partnering
arrangements with key suppliers and distributors, seeing them as partners in delivering value to final customers so everybody benefits.

Integrated Marketing
Integrated marketing occurs when the marketer devises marketing activities and assembles marketing programs to create, communicate, and deliver value for consumers such that “the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts.” Two key themes are that (1) many different marketing activities
can create, communicate, and deliver value and (2) marketers should design and implement any
one marketing activity with all other activities in mind. When a hospital buys an MRI from General
Electric’s Medical Systems division, for instance, it expects good installation, maintenance, and
training services to go with the purchase.

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

| CHAPTER 1

21

All company communications also must be integrated. Using an integrated communication
strategy means choosing communication options that reinforce and complement each other. A
marketer might selectively employ television, radio, and print advertising, public relations and
events, and PR and Web site communications so each contributes on its own as well as improving the effectiveness of the others. Each must also deliver a consistent brand message at every
contact.
When BMW launched the modernized MINI Cooper in 2002, it employed an integrated marketing strategy in the United States that included a broad mix of media: billboards, posters,
Internet, print, PR, product placement, and grassroots campaigns. Many were linked to a cleverly
designed Web site with product and dealer information. The car was placed atop Ford Excursion
SUVs at 21 auto shows across the United States, was used as seats in a sports stadium, and appeared
in Playboy magazine as a centerfold. The imaginative integrated campaign built a six-month waiting list for the MINI Cooper.
The company must also develop an integrated channel strategy. It should assess each channel
option for its direct effect on product sales and brand equity, as well as its indirect effect through
interactions with other channel options. Marketers must weigh the trade-off between having too
many channels (leading to conflict among channel members and/or a lack of support) and too few
(resulting in market opportunities being overlooked).
Online marketing activities are increasingly prominent in building brands and sales. Created for
$300,000 and no additional promotional expense, the Carnival Connections site made it easy for
cruise fans to compare notes on destinations and onboard entertainment from casinos to conga
lines. In a few short months, 2,000 of the site’s 13,000 registered users planned trips aboard
Carnival’s 22 ships, generating an estimated $1.6 million in revenue for the company.47

Internal Marketing
Internal marketing, an element of holistic marketing, is the task of hiring, training, and motivating able employees who want to serve customers well. It ensures that everyone in the organization
embraces appropriate marketing principles, especially senior management. Smart marketers recognize that marketing activities within the company can be as important—or even more important—
than those directed outside the company. It makes no sense to promise excellent service before the
company’s staff is ready to provide it.

Snowshoe Mountain

Snowshoe Mountain in Snowshoe, West
Virginia, embarked on a marketing program to better brand the ski resort with a promise
of an “authentic, rustic and engaging wilderness experience.” In launching a branding
initiative to define their goals and articulate what they wanted the Snowshoe Mountain
To improve its guests’ experiences,
Snowshoe Mountain ski resort
engages in a series of internal
marketing activities to build its
brand promise with employees.

22

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

brand to represent to visitors, the resort’s marketers started inside. They incorporated the new brand
promise in a 40-page brand book that contained the history of the resort and a list of seven attitude
words that characterized how employees should interact with guests. On-mountain messaging
and signs also reminded employees to deliver on the brand promise. All new hires received a brand
presentation from the director of marketing to help them better understand the brand and become
effective advocates.48
Marketing is no longer the responsibility of a single department—it is a company-wide undertaking that drives the company’s vision, mission, and strategic planning.49 It succeeds only
when all departments work together to achieve customer goals (see
Table 1.1): when engineering designs the right products, finance furnishes the right amount of funding, purchasing
buys the right materials, production makes the right products in the right time horizon, and accounting measures profitability in the right ways. Such interdepartmental harmony can only
truly coalesce, however, when management clearly communicates a vision of how the company’s
marketing orientation and philosophy serve customers. The following example highlights some
of the potential challenge in integrating marketing:
The marketing vice president of a major European airline wants to increase the airline’s
traffic share. His strategy is to build up customer satisfaction by providing better food,
cleaner cabins, better-trained cabin crews, and lower fares, yet he has no authority in
these matters. The catering department chooses food that keeps food costs down; the
maintenance department uses inexpensive cleaning services; the human resources department hires people without regard to whether they are naturally friendly; the finance
department sets the fares. Because these departments generally take a cost or production
point of view, the vice president of marketing is stymied in his efforts to create an integrated marketing program.
Internal marketing requires vertical alignment with senior management and horizontal
alignment with other departments, so everyone understands, appreciates, and supports the marketing effort.

Performance Marketing
Performance marketing requires understanding the financial and nonfinancial returns to business and society from marketing activities and programs. Top marketers are increasingly going
beyond sales revenue to examine the marketing scorecard and interpret what is happening to
market share, customer loss rate, customer satisfaction, product quality, and other measures. They
are also considering the legal, ethical, social, and environmental effects of marketing activities and
programs.

FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY Marketers are increasingly asked to justify their
investments in financial and profitability terms, as well as in terms of building the brand and
growing the customer base.50 They’re employing a broader variety of financial measures to assess
the direct and indirect value their marketing efforts create and recognizing that much of their
firms’ market value comes from intangible assets, particularly brands, customer base, employees,
distributor and supplier relations, and intellectual capital. Marketing metrics can help firms
quantify and compare their marketing performance along a broad set of dimensions. Marketing
research and statistical analysis assess the financial efficiency and effectiveness of different
marketing activities. Finally, firms can employ processes and systems to make sure they maximize
the value from analyzing these different metrics.

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY MARKETING Because the effects of marketing extend beyond
the company and the customer to society as a whole, marketers must consider the ethical,
environmental, legal, and social context of their role and activities.51
The organization’s task is thus to determine the needs, wants, and interests of target markets and
satisfy them more effectively and efficiently than competitors while preserving or enhancing consumers’ and society’s long-term well-being. LG Electronics, Toshiba, and NEC Display Solutions

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

TABLE 1.1

Assessing Which Company Departments Are
Customer-Minded

R&D
• They spend time meeting customers and listening to their problems.
• They welcome the involvement of marketing, manufacturing, and other departments to each new
project.
• They benchmark competitors’ products and seek “best of class” solutions.
• They solicit customer reactions and suggestions as the project progresses.
• They continuously improve and refine the product on the basis of market feedback.
Purchasing
• They proactively search for the best suppliers.
• They build long-term relationships with fewer but more reliable, high-quality suppliers.
• They don’t compromise quality for price savings.
Manufacturing
• They invite customers to visit and tour their plants.
• They visit customer plants.
• They willingly work overtime to meet promised delivery schedules.
• They continuously search for ways to produce goods faster and/or at lower cost.
• They continuously improve product quality, aiming for zero defects.
• They meet customer requirements for “customization” where possible.
Marketing
• They study customer needs and wants in well-defined market segments.
• They allocate marketing effort in relation to the long-run profit potential of the targeted segments.
• They develop winning offers for each target segment.
• They measure company image and customer satisfaction on a continuous basis.
• They continuously gather and evaluate ideas for new products, product improvements, and services.
• They urge all company departments and employees to be customer centered.
Sales
• They have specialized knowledge of the customer’s industry.
• They strive to give the customer “the best solution.”
• They make only promises that they can keep.
• They feed back customers’ needs and ideas to those in charge of product development.
• They serve the same customers for a long period of time.
Logistics
• They set a high standard for service delivery time and meet this standard consistently.
• They operate a knowledgeable and friendly customer service department that can answer questions, handle complaints, and resolve problems in a satisfactory and timely manner.
Accounting
• They prepare periodic “profitability” reports by product, market segment, geographic areas
(regions, sales territories), order sizes, channels, and individual customers.
• They prepare invoices tailored to customer needs and answer customer queries courteously
and quickly.
Finance
• They understand and support marketing expenditures (e.g., image advertising) that produce
long-term customer preference and loyalty.
• They tailor the financial package to the customer’s financial requirements.
• They make quick decisions on customer creditworthiness.
Public Relations
• They send out favorable news about the company and “damage control” unfavorable news.
• They act as an internal customer and public advocate for better company policies and practices.
Source: ©Philip Kotler, Kotler on Marketing (New York: Free Press, 1999), pp. 21–22. Reprinted with permission of The Free Press, a Division of
Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group. Copyright © 1999 by Philip Kotler. All rights reserved.

| CHAPTER 1

23

24

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

PART 1

TABLE 1.2

Corporate Social Initiatives

Type

Description

Example

Corporate social
marketing

Supporting behavior change
campaigns

McDonald’s promotion of a statewide childhood immunization
campaign in Oklahoma

Cause marketing

Promoting social issues through efforts such as
sponsorships, licensing agreements,
and advertising

McDonald’s sponsorship of Forest (a gorilla) at Sydney’s Zoo—a
10-year sponsorship commitment, aimed at preserving this
endangered species

Cause-related
marketing

Donating a percentage of revenues to a specific
cause based on the revenue occurring during the
announced period of support

McDonald’s earmarking of $1 for Ronald McDonald Children’s
Charities from the sale of every Big Mac and pizza sold
on McHappy Day

Corporate philanthropy

Making gifts of money, goods, or time to help
nonprofit organizations, groups, or individuals

McDonald’s contributions to Ronald McDonald House Charities

Corporate community
involvement

Providing in-kind or volunteer services in the
community

McDonald’s catering meals for firefighters in the December 1997
bushfires in Australia

Socially responsible
business practices

Adapting and conducting business practices
that protect the environment and human
and animal rights

McDonald’s requirement that suppliers increase the amount
of living space for laying hens on factory farms

Source: Philip Kotler and Nancy Lee, Corporate Social Responsibility: Doing the Most Good for Your Company and Your Cause (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004). Copyright © 2005 by Philip Kotler and Nancy Lee.
Used by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Stonyfield Farm Social responsibility has been at the core of Stonyfield
Farm—makers of all-natural organic yogurts—from the start. Stonyfield’s suppliers
eschew the productivity practices of agribusiness, including the use of antibiotics, growth
hormones, pesticides, and fertilizers. After calculating the amount of energy used to run its
plant, Stonyfield decided to make an equivalent investment in environmental projects such
as reforestation and wind farms. The company dropped plastic lids on its yogurt, saving
about a million pounds of plastic a year, and added on-package messages about global warming, the
perils of hormones, and genetically modified foods. It makes low-fat versions of its products, and adds
cultures or dietary supplements to help the immune system fight off illness. The attitudes and beliefs
Stonyfield adopted have not hurt its financial performance as it has become the number-three yogurt
brand in the United States.54
Stonyfield
Farm

Ben & Jerry’s “triple bottom line”
business philosophy is based on
monitoring the environmental and
social effects of its actions in addition to the profits from the sale of
its products.

offer electronic recycling programs, for instance, often providing
consumers with prepaid postage to return old items. Retailers such
as Office Depot, Best Buy, and AT&T offer similar programs in their
stores.
Table 1.2 displays some different types of corporate social
initiatives, illustrated by McDonald’s.52
As goods become more commoditized, and consumers grow
more socially conscious, some companies—including The Body
Shop, Timberland, and Patagonia—incorporate social responsibility as a way to differentiate themselves from competitors, build
consumer preference, and achieve notable sales and profit gains.
When they founded Ben & Jerry’s, Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield
embraced the performance marketing concept by dividing the
traditional financial bottom line into a “double bottom line” that
also measured the environmental impact of their products and
processes. That later expanded into a “triple bottom line,” to represent the social impacts, negative and positive, of the firm’s entire
range of business activities.53

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

| CHAPTER 1

Updating The Four Ps
McCarthy classified various marketing activities into marketing-mix tools of four broad kinds,
which he called the four Ps of marketing: product, price, place, and promotion.55 The marketing
variables under each P are shown in
Figure 1.4.
Given the breadth, complexity, and richness of marketing, however—as exemplified by holistic
marketing—clearly these four Ps are not the whole story anymore. If we update them to reflect the
holistic marketing concept, we arrive at a more representative set that encompasses modern marketing realities: people, processes, programs, and performance, as in
Figure 1.5.
People reflects, in part, internal marketing and the fact that employees are critical to marketing
success. Marketing will only be as good as the people inside the organization. It also reflects the fact
that marketers must view consumers as people to understand their lives more broadly, and not just
as they shop for and consume products and services.
Processes reflects all the creativity, discipline, and structure brought to marketing
management. Marketers must avoid ad hoc planning and decision making and ensure
that state-of-the-art marketing ideas and concepts play an appropriate role in all they do.
Only by instituting the right set of processes to guide activities and programs can a firm engage
in mutually beneficial long-term relationships. Another important set of processes guides
the firm in imaginatively generating insights and breakthrough products, services, and
marketing activities.
Programs reflects all the firm’s consumer-directed activities. It encompasses the old four Ps as
well as a range of other marketing activities that might not fit as neatly into the old view of marketing. Regardless of whether they are online or offline, traditional or nontraditional, these activities
must be integrated such that their whole is greater than the sum of their parts and they accomplish
multiple objectives for the firm.

|Fig. 1.4|
Marketing mix

Product
Product variety
Quality
Design
Features
Brand name
Packaging
Sizes
Services
Warranties
Returns

Place
Channels
Coverage
Assortments
Locations
Inventory
Transport
Price
List price
Discounts
Allowances
Payment period
Credit terms

Marketing
Mix
Four Ps

The Four P
Components of the
Marketing Mix

Promotion
Sales promotion
Advertising
Sales force
Public relations
Direct marketing

Modern Marketing
Management
Four Ps

Product

People

Place

Processes

Promotion

Programs

Price

Performance

|Fig. 1.5|

The Evolution
of Marketing
Management

25

26

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

We define performance as in holistic marketing, to capture the range of possible outcome measures
that have financial and nonfinancial implications (profitability as well as brand and customer equity),
and implications beyond the company itself (social responsibility, legal, ethical, and community related).
Finally, these new four Ps actually apply to all disciplines within the company, and by thinking
this way, managers grow more closely aligned with the rest of the company.

Marketing Management Tasks
With the holistic marketing philosophy as a backdrop, we can identify a specific set of tasks that
make up successful marketing management and marketing leadership. We’ll use the following situation to illustrate these tasks in the context of the plan of the book. (The “Marketing Memo:
Marketers’ Frequently Asked Questions” is a good checklist for the questions marketing managers
ask, all of which we examine in this book.)
Zeus Inc. (name disguised) operates in several industries, including chemicals, cameras,
and film. The company is organized into SBUs. Corporate management is considering
what to do with its Atlas camera division, which produces a range of 35mm and digital
cameras. Although Zeus has a sizable share and is producing revenue, the 35mm market
is rapidly declining. In the much faster-growing digital camera segment, Zeus faces
strong competition and has been slow to gain sales. Zeus’s corporate management wants
Atlas’s marketing group to produce a strong turnaround plan for the division.

Developing Marketing Strategies and Plans
The first task facing Atlas is to identify its potential long-run opportunities, given its market experience and core competencies (see Chapter 2). Atlas can design its cameras with better features. It
can make a line of video cameras, or it can use its core competency in optics to design a line of
binoculars and telescopes. Whichever direction it chooses, it must develop concrete marketing
plans that specify the marketing strategy and tactics going forward.

Capturing Marketing Insights
Atlas needs a reliable marketing information system to closely monitor its marketing environment so
it can continually assess market potential and forecast demand. Its microenvironment consists of all
the players who affect its ability to produce and sell cameras—suppliers, marketing intermediaries,
customers, and competitors. Its macroenvironment includes demographic, economic, physical, technological, political-legal, and social-cultural forces that affect sales and profits (see Chapter 3).
Atlas also needs a dependable marketing research system. To transform strategy into programs,
marketing managers must make basic decisions about their expenditures, activities, and budget

marketing

Memo

Marketers’ Frequently Asked Questions

1. How can we spot and choose the right market segment(s)?

9. How can we keep our customers loyal longer?

2. How can we differentiate our offerings?

10. How can we tell which customers are more important?

3. How should we respond to customers who buy on price?
4. How can we compete against lower-cost, lower-price competitors?

11. How can we measure the payback from advertising, sales promotion,
and public relations?

5. How far can we go in customizing our offering for each customer?

12. How can we improve sales force productivity?

6. How can we grow our business?

13. How can we establish multiple channels and yet manage channel conflict?

7. How can we build stronger brands?

14. How can we get the other company departments to be more
customer-oriented?

8. How can we reduce the cost of customer acquisition?

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

allocations. They may use sales-response functions that show how the amount of money spent in
each application will affect sales and profits (see Chapter 4).

Connecting with Customers
Atlas must consider how to best create value for its chosen target markets and develop strong, profitable, long-term relationships with customers (see Chapter 5). To do so, it needs to understand consumer markets (see Chapter 6). Who buys cameras, and why? What features and prices are they
looking for, and where do they shop? Atlas also sells cameras to business markets, including large
corporations, professional firms, retailers, and government agencies (see Chapter 7), where purchasing agents or buying committees make the decisions. Atlas needs to gain a full understanding of how
organizational buyers buy. It needs a sales force well trained in presenting product benefits.
Atlas will not want to market to all possible customers. It must divide the market into major
market segments, evaluate each one, and target those it can best serve (see Chapter 8).

Building Strong Brands
Atlas must understand the strengths and weaknesses of the Zeus brand as customers see it (see
Chapter 9). Is its 35mm film heritage a handicap in the digital camera market? Suppose Atlas decides to focus on the consumer market and develop a positioning strategy (see Chapter 10). Should
it position itself as the “Cadillac” brand, offering superior cameras at a premium price with excellent service and strong advertising? Should it build a simple, low-priced camera aimed at more
price-conscious consumers? Or something in between?
Atlas must also pay close attention to competitors (see Chapter 11), anticipating their moves
and knowing how to react quickly and decisively. It may want to initiate some surprise moves, in
which case it needs to anticipate how its competitors will respond.

Shaping the Market Offerings
At the heart of the marketing program is the product—the firm’s tangible offering to the market,
which includes the product quality, design, features, and packaging (see Chapter 12). To gain a
competitive advantage, Atlas may provide leasing, delivery, repair, and training as part of its product offering (see Chapter 13).
A critical marketing decision relates to price (see Chapter 14). Atlas must decide on wholesale
and retail prices, discounts, allowances, and credit terms. Its price should match well with the offer’s perceived value; otherwise, buyers will turn to competitors’ products.

Delivering Value
Atlas must also determine how to properly deliver to the target market the value embodied in its
products and services. Channel activities include those the company undertakes to make the product accessible and available to target customers (see Chapter 15). Atlas must identify, recruit, and
link various marketing facilitators to supply its products and services efficiently to the target market. It must understand the various types of retailers, wholesalers, and physical-distribution firms
and how they make their decisions (see Chapter 16).

Communicating Value
Atlas must also adequately communicate to the target market the value embodied by its products
and services. It will need an integrated marketing communication program that maximizes the individual and collective contribution of all communication activities (see Chapter 17). Atlas needs to
set up mass communication programs consisting of advertising, sales promotion, events, and public
relations (see Chapter 18). It also needs to plan more personal communications, in the form of direct and interactive marketing, as well as hire, train, and motivate salespeople (see Chapter 19).

Creating Successful Long-Term Growth
Based on its product positioning, Atlas must initiate new-product development, testing, and
launching as part of its long-term view (see Chapter 20). The strategy should take into account
changing global opportunities and challenges (see Chapter 21).

| CHAPTER 1

27

28

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Finally, Atlas must build a marketing organization capable of implementing the marketing plan
(see Chapter 22). Because surprises and disappointments can occur as marketing plans unfold,
Atlas will need feedback and control to understand the efficiency and effectiveness of its marketing
activities and how it can improve them.56

Summary
1. Marketing is an organizational function and a set of
processes for creating, communicating, and delivering value to customers and for managing customer
relationships in ways that benefit the organization
and its stakeholders. Marketing management is the
art and science of choosing target markets and
getting, keeping, and growing customers through
creating, delivering, and communicating superior
customer value.
2. Marketers are skilled at managing demand: they seek
to influence its level, timing, and composition for goods,
services, events, experiences, persons, places, properties, organizations, information, and ideas. They also
operate in four different marketplaces: consumer, business, global, and nonprofit.
3. Marketing is not done only by the marketing department. It needs to affect every aspect of the customer
experience. To create a strong marketing organization,
marketers must think like executives in other departments, and executives in other departments must think
more like marketers.
4. Today’s marketplace is fundamentally different as a result of major societal forces that have resulted in many
new consumer and company capabilities. These
forces have created new opportunities and challenges

and changed marketing management significantly as
companies seek new ways to achieve marketing
excellence.
5. There are five competing concepts under which organizations can choose to conduct their business:
the production concept, the product concept, the selling concept, the marketing concept, and the holistic
marketing concept. The first three are of limited use
today.
6. The holistic marketing concept is based on the development, design, and implementation of marketing programs, processes, and activities that recognize their
breadth and interdependencies. Holistic marketing recognizes that everything matters in marketing and that a
broad, integrated perspective is often necessary. Four
components of holistic marketing are relationship marketing, integrated marketing, internal marketing, and
socially responsible marketing.
7. The set of tasks necessary for successful marketing
management includes developing marketing strategies
and plans, capturing marketing insights, connecting
with customers, building strong brands, shaping the
market offerings, delivering and communicating value,
and creating long-term growth.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Does Marketing Create or Satisfy
Needs?
Marketing has often been defined in terms of satisfying customers’ needs and wants. Critics, however, maintain that
marketing goes beyond that and creates needs and wants
that did not exist before. They feel marketers encourage
consumers to spend more money than they should on
goods and services they do not really need.
Take a position: Marketing shapes consumer needs
and wants versus Marketing merely reflects the needs
and wants of consumers.

Marketing Discussion
Shifts in Marketing
Consider the broad shifts in marketing. Do any themes
emerge in them? Can you relate the shifts to the major societal forces? Which force has contributed to which shift?

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

Marketing Excellence

>>Nike

Nike hit the ground running in 1962. Originally known as Blue Ribbon Sports,
the company focused on providing high-quality running
shoes designed for athletes by athletes. Founder Philip
Knight believed high-tech shoes for runners could be manufactured at competitive prices if imported from abroad. Nike’s
commitment to designing innovative footwear for serious athletes helped it build a cult following among U.S. consumers.
Nike believed in a “pyramid of influence” in which the
preferences of a small percentage of top athletes influenced
the product and brand choices of others. From the start its
marketing campaigns featured accomplished athletes.
Runner Steve Prefontaine, the first spokesperson, had an irreverent attitude that matched the company’s spirit.
In 1985, Nike signed up then-rookie guard Michael
Jordan as a spokesperson. Jordan was still an up-andcomer, but he personified superior performance. Nike’s
bet paid off—the Air Jordan line of basketball shoes flew
off the shelves and revenues hit over $100 million in the
first year alone. As one reporter stated, “Few marketers
have so reliably been able to identify and sign athletes
who transcend their sports to such great effect.”
In 1988, Nike aired the first ads in its $20 million “Just Do
It” ad campaign. The campaign, which ultimately featured 12
TV spots in all, subtly challenged a generation of athletic enthusiasts to chase their goals. It was a natural manifestation
of Nike’s attitude of self-empowerment through sports.
As Nike began expanding overseas to Europe, it
found that its U.S.-style ads were seen as too aggressive.
Nike realized it had to “authenticate” its brand in Europe,
so it focused on soccer (known as football outside the
United States) and became active as a sponsor of youth
leagues, local clubs, and national teams. However, for
Nike to build authenticity among the soccer audience,
consumers had to see professional athletes using its
product, especially athletes who won. Nike’s big break
came in 1994 when the Brazilian team (the only national
team for which Nike had any real sponsorship) won the
World Cup. That victory transformed Nike’s image in

| CHAPTER 1

29

Europe from a sneaker company into a brand that represented emotion, allegiance, and identification. It also
helped launch Nike into other international markets over
the next decade, and by 2003, overseas revenues surpassed U.S. revenues for the first time.
In 2007, Nike acquired Umbro, a British maker of
soccer-related footwear, apparel, and equipment. The acquisition helped boost Nike’s presence in soccer as the
company became the sole supplier of uniforms to over
100 professional soccer teams around the world.
Nike focused its efforts on international markets, especially China, during the 2008 Summer Olympics in
Beijing. Although Nike’s rival, Adidas, was the official
sponsor of the Olympic Games, Nike received special
permission from the International Olympic Committee to
run Nike ads featuring Olympic athletes during the games.
In addition, Nike sponsored several teams and athletes,
including most of the Chinese teams and 11 of the 12
high-profile members on the United States men’s basketball teams. That year, sales in the Asian region grew
15 percent to $3.3 billion and Nike’s international divisions
grew to 53 percent of the company’s revenue. Some believed Nike’s marketing strategy during the Olympics was
more effective than Adidas’s Olympic sponsorship.
In addition to expanding the brand overseas, Nike
successfully entered new athletic footwear, apparel, and
equipment product categories by using endorsements
from high-profile athletes and consumer outreach programs. The Nike Golf brand, endorsed by Tiger Woods,
has changed the way professional golfers dress. Tiger’s
powerful influence on the game and his Nike emblazoned
style have turned the greens at the majors into “golf’s
fashion runway.” In addition, Nike has used the superstar
to help build its relationship with consumers. In 2009, it
launched a Tiger Web Talkback session at nikegolf.com,
where fans could ask questions and hear Tiger talk about
golf. The session was part of a nationwide Nike Golf consumer experience day, which included equipment demos,
long-drive contests, and in-store specials.
In tennis, Nike has aligned with Maria Sharapova,
Roger Federer, and Rafael Nadal to push its line of tennis
clothing and gear. Some called the famous 2008
Wimbledon match between Roger Federer and Rafael
Nadal—both dressed in swooshes from head to toe—a
five-hour Nike commercial valued at $10.6 million.
Nike teamed up with seven-time Tour de France champion Lance Armstrong not only to sell Nike products but also
to help Armstrong’s LIVESTRONG campaign. Nike designed,
manufactured, and sold over 70 million yellow LIVESTRONG
bracelets, netting $80 million for the Lance Armstrong
Foundation. It also featured Armstrong’s message of survival,
willpower, and giving in a series of Nike commercials.
To promote its line of basketball shoes and apparel, Nike
continues to feature basketball superstars such as Kobe
Bryant and LeBron James. In addition, it formed a partnership with Foot Locker to create a new chain of stores, House

30

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

of Hoops by Foot Locker, which offers only basketball products by Nike brands such as Converse and Jordan.
Recently, Nike’s lead in the running category has
grown to 60 percent market share thanks to its exclusive
partnership with Apple. Nike (Plus) technology includes
a sensor that runners put into their running shoes and a
receiver, which fits into an iPod, iTouch, or iPhone. When
the athlete goes for a run or hits the gym, the receiver
captures his or her mileage, calories burned, and pace
and stores it until the information is downloaded. Nike is
now considered the world’s largest running club.
In 2008 and 2009, Nike hosted the Human Race
10K, the largest and only global virtual race in the world.
The event, designed to celebrate running, drew 780,000
participants in 2008 and surpassed that number in 2009.
To participate, runners register online, gear up with
Nike technology, and hit the road on race day, running
any 10K route they choose at any time during the day.
Once the data is downloaded from the Nike receiver,
each runner’s official time is posted and can be compared to the times of runners from around the world.
Like many companies, Nike is trying to make its company and products more eco-friendly. However, unlike
many companies, Nike does not promote its efforts. One
brand consultant explained, “Nike has always been about
winning. How is sustainability relevant to its brand?” Nike
executives agree that promoting an eco-friendly message

Marketing Excellence

>>Google

In 1998, two Stanford
University PhD students, Larry Page and Sergey
Brin, founded a search engine company and named it
Google. The name plays on the number googol—1 followed
by 100 zeroes—and refers to the massive quantity of data
available online that the company helps users find. Google’s
corporate mission is “To organize the world’s information
and make it universally accessible and useful.” From the
beginning, Google has strived to be one of the “good guys”
in the corporate world, supporting a touchy-feely work

would distract from its slick high-tech image, so efforts
like recycling old shoes into new shoes are kept quiet.
Today, Nike dominates the athletic footwear market
with a 31 percent market share globally and a 50 percent market share in the United States. Swooshes
abound on everything from wristwatches to skateboards
to swimming caps. The firm’s long-term strategy focuses
on basketball, running, football, women’s fitness, men’s
training, and sports culture. As a result of its successful
expansion across geographic markets and product categories, Nike is the top athletic apparel and footwear
manufacturer in the world, with corporate fiscal 2009
revenues exceeding $19 billion.
Questions
1. What are the pros, cons, and risks associated with
Nike’s core marketing strategy?
2. If you were Adidas, how would you compete with Nike?
Sources: Justin Ewers and Tim Smart,“A Designer Swooshes In,” U.S. News & World Report, January 26,
2004, p. 12; “Corporate Media Executive of the Year,” Delaney Report, January 12, 2004, p. 1; Barbara
Lippert, “Game Changers: Inside the Three Greatest Ad Campaigns of the Past Three Decades,” Adweek,
November 17, 2008; “10 Top Nontraditional Campaigns,” Advertising Age, December 22, 2003, p. 24;
Chris Zook and James Allen, “Growth Outside the Core,” Harvard Business Review, December 2003,
p. 66; Jeremy Mullman, “NIKE; What Slowdown? Swoosh Rides Games to New High,” Advertising Age,
October 20, 2008, p. 34; Allison Kaplan, “Look Just Like Tiger (until you swing),” America’s Intelligence
Wire, August 9, 2009; Reena Jana and Burt Helm, “Nike Goes Green, Very Quietly,” BusinessWeek,
June 22, 2009.

environment, strong ethics, and a famous founding credo:
“Don’t be evil.”
The company has become the market leader for
search engines through its business focus and constant
innovation. As Google grew into a primary destination for
Web users searching for information online, it attracted a
host of online advertisers. These advertisers drove Google’s
revenue by buying “search ads,” little text-based boxes
shown alongside search results that advertisers pay for
only when users click on them. Google’s search ad program, called AdWords, sells space on its search pages to
ads linked with specific keywords. Google auctions off the
keyword ads, with prime keywords and page locations
going to the highest bidder. Google recently added a
program called AdSense, which allows any Web site to
display targeted Google ads related to the content of its
site. Web site publishers earn money every time visitors
click on these ads.
In addition to offering prime online “real estate” for advertisers, Google adds value by providing tools to better target their ads and better understand the effectiveness of their
marketing. Google Analytics, free to Google’s advertisers,
provides a custom report, or dashboard, detailing how
Internet users found the site, what ads they saw and/or
clicked on, how they behaved while there, and how much
traffic was generated. Google client Discount Tire was able

DEFINING MARKETING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

to identify where visitors encountered problems that led
them to abandon a purchase midstream. After modifying its
site and updating its keyword search campaign, Discount
Tire measured a 14 percent increase in sales within a week.
With its ability to deploy data that enable up-to-theminute improvements in a Web marketing program, Google
supports a style of marketing in which the advertising
resources and budget can be constantly monitored and optimized. Google calls this approach “marketing asset management,” implying that advertising should be managed like
assets in a portfolio depending on the market conditions.
Rather than following a marketing plan developed months in
advance, companies use the real-time data collected on
their campaigns to optimize the campaign’s effectiveness
and be more responsive to the market.
Over the past decade, Google has expanded far beyond its search capabilities with numerous other services,
applications, and tools. It creates and distributes its products
for free, which in turn provide new opportunities for the firm
to sell additional targeted advertising space. Since 97 percent
of Google’s revenues come from online advertising, new
advertising space is critical to the company’s growth.
Google’s wide range of products and services fall into
five categories: desktop products, mobile products, Web
products, hardware products, and other products. Desktop
products include both stand-alone applications such as
Google Earth (a virtual globe that uses satellite imagery and
aerial photography), Google Chrome (a Web browser), and
Google Video/YouTube (Google acquired the video hosting
site YouTube in 2006 for $1.65 billion), or desktop extensions such as Google Toolbar (a browser toolbar). Mobile
products include all Google products available for mobile
devices. Web products are broken down into the following
subsets—advertising (e.g., AdWorks, DoubleClick, Clickto-Call), communications and publishing (e.g., Google
Docs, Google Calendar, Google Gadgets, Wave), development (e.g., Android, Google Code), mapping (e.g., Google
Sky, Google Maps), Search (e.g., Google Dictionary,
Google Alerts, Google Scholar), and statistics (e.g., Google
Trends, Google Analytics).
Google’s stage of development starts within Google
Labs, which lists new products available for testing. It next
moves to beta status, where invited users test early prototypes. Once the product is fully tested and ready to be released to the general public, it moves into the gold stage
as a core Google product. Google Voice, for example, is
in the beta stage. It provides consumers with one Google
phone number, which then connects to the user’s home,
office, and cell numbers. The user decides which phones
ring, based on who calls. Due to Google Voice’s complexity and popularity, users can sign up only by invitation.
Google has not spent a lot of money on traditional
advertising. Recent efforts have targeted Microsoft consumers with appeals to use Google’s “cloud computing”
applications instead of Microsoft Office or Windows. By

| CHAPTER 1

31

“Going Google,” a user can access all of his or her documents and applications via a Web browser instead of
owning the physical infrastructure and software. In addition, in 2009 Google launched its first-ever television commercial for Google Chrome, an alternative to Microsoft’s
Internet Explorer Web browser.
Google is also betting big in the mobile category. With
its 2008 launch of Android, a mobile operating system,
Google went head-to-head with Apple’s iPhone. Although
many still prefer Apple’s platform, even critics have praised
Android’s benefits. Most importantly, Android is free, open
sourced, and backed by a multimillion-dollar investment.
That means Google wants its partners to help build and
design Android over the years. In addition, the iPhone is
available only through AT&T in the United States, while
most of AT&T’s competitors support Android phones. If
Google influences millions of new consumers to use smart
phones, it could make billions in mobile advertising. One
analyst stated that Google “is trying to get ahead of the
curve with these initiatives so when [mobile advertising]
becomes mainstream, Google will be one of the major
players, and display is a key growth area for Google.”
Google’s goal is to reach as many people as possible
on the Web—whether by PC or by phone. The more
users on the Web, the more advertising Google can sell.
Google’s new products also accomplish this goal and
make the Web a more personalized experience. One program allows users to mark their current position on
Google Maps, click the local tab, and receive information
about local restaurants, bars, and entertainment venues.
Google has enjoyed great success as a company and
a brand since its launch. When it experienced an hour-long
outage in 2009, worldwide Internet traffic decreased by
5 percent. In 2009, Google held a 65 percent market share
in search in the United States, significantly greater than
second place Yahoo!’s 20 percent market share. Globally,
Google held a more dominant lead with 89 percent market
share versus Yahoo!’s 5 percent and MSN’s 3 percent.
Google’s revenues topped $21 billion in 2008, and the
company was ranked the most powerful brand in the
world with a brand value of $86 billion.
Questions
1. With a portfolio as diverse as Google’s, what are the
company’s core brand values?
2. What’s next for Google? Is it doing the right thing taking on Microsoft with the concept of cloud computing, and Apple in the fight for smart phones?
Sources: www.google.com; Catherine P. Taylor, “Google Flex,” Adweek, March 20, 2006, cover
story; Richard Karpinski, “Keywords, Analytics Help Define User Lifetime Value,” Advertising Age,
April 24, 2006, p. S2; Danny Gorog, “Survival Guide,” Herald Sun, March 29, 2006; Julie Schlosser,
“Google,” Fortune, October 31, 2005, pp. 168–69; Jefferson Graham, “Google’s Profit Sails Past
Expectations,” USA Today, October 21, 2005; Dan Frommer, “BrandZ Top 100 2008 Report”;
“Google’s Android Mobile Platform Is Getting Huge,” Advertising Age, October 8, 2009; Rita Chang,
“Google Set for Richer Advertising on Smartphones,” Advertising Age, October 5, 2009.

32

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How does marketing affect
customer value?
2. How is strategic planning
carried out at different levels of
the organization?
3. What does a marketing plan
include?

Yahoo! faces many strategic challenges
as it attempts to fend off competition from
Google and others.

2

Developing Marketing
Strategies and Plans
Key ingredients of the marketing management process are insightful,
creative strategies and plans that can guide marketing activities. Developing the right marketing
strategy over time requires a blend of discipline and flexibility. Firms must stick to a strategy but
also constantly improve it. They must also develop strategies for a range of products and services
within the organization.

Founded in 1994 by Web-surfing Stanford University grad students, Yahoo! grew from a tiny
upstart surrounded by Silicon Valley heavyweights to a powerful force in Internet media.
Yahoo! worked hard to be more than just a search engine. The company proudly proclaims it
is “The only place anyone needs to go to find anything, communicate with anyone, or buy
anything.” Its range of services includes e-mail, news, weather, music, photos, games, shopping, auctions, and travel. A large percentage of revenues comes from advertising, but the company also
profits from subscription services such as online personal ads, premium e-mail, and small-business services.
Although Yahoo! strives to achieve a competitive advantage over rival Google with its vast array of original
content, Google’s ascension to the runaway leader in search, e-mail, and related services has made it a
darling with advertisers. Yahoo!’s acquisition of photo-sharing service Flickr, social bookmark manager
Del.icio.us, and online video editing site Jumpcut strengthened its capabilities. Yahoo! has also continued to
grow globally in Europe and Asia, helped in part by the acquisition of Kelkoo, a European comparisonshopping site, for $579 million, and of 46 percent of Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce company, for $1 billion
in cash. Discussions with Microsoft about a possible merger culminated in a
10-year deal in June 2009 that gave Microsoft full access to the Yahoo! This chapter begins by examining some of the
search engine, to be used in future Microsoft projects for its own search strategic marketing implications in creating customer value.
engine, Bing. CEO Carol Bartz faced many questions, however, about how We’ll look at several perspectives on planning and describe how
Yahoo! should best move forward.1
to draw up a formal marketing plan.

Marketing and Customer
Value
The task of any business is to deliver customer value at a profit. In a hypercompetitive economy
with increasingly informed buyers faced with abundant choices, a company can win only by finetuning the value delivery process and choosing, providing, and communicating superior value.

The Value Delivery Process
The traditional view of marketing is that the firm makes something and then sells it, with marketing
taking place in the selling process. Companies that subscribe to this view have the best chance of
33

34

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

succeeding in economies marked by goods shortages where consumers are not fussy about quality,
features, or style—for example, basic staple goods in developing markets.
This traditional view will not work, however, in economies with many different types of people,
each with individual wants, perceptions, preferences, and buying criteria. The smart competitor must
design and deliver offerings for well-defined target markets. This realization inspired a new view of
business processes that places marketing at the beginning of planning. Instead of emphasizing making
and selling, companies now see themselves as part of a value delivery process.
We can divide the value creation and delivery sequence into three phases.2 First, choosing the
value represents the “homework” marketing must do before any product exists. Marketers must
segment the market, select the appropriate target, and develop the offering’s value positioning. The
formula “segmentation, targeting, positioning (STP)” is the essence of strategic marketing. The second phase is providing the value. Marketing must determine specific product features, prices, and
distribution. The task in the third phase is communicating the value by utilizing the sales force,
Internet, advertising, and any other communication tools to announce and promote the product.
The value delivery process begins before there is a product and continues through development
and after launch. Each phase has cost implications.

The Value Chain
Harvard’s Michael Porter has proposed the value chain as a tool for identifying ways to create more
customer value.3 According to this model, every firm is a synthesis of activities performed to design,
produce, market, deliver, and support its product. The value chain identifies nine strategically relevant
activities—five primary and four support activities—that create value and cost in a specific business.
The primary activities are (1) inbound logistics, or bringing materials into the business; (2) operations, or converting materials into final products; (3) outbound logistics, or shipping out final
products; (4) marketing, which includes sales; and (5) service. Specialized departments handle the
support activities—(1) procurement, (2) technology development, (3) human resource management,
and (4) firm infrastructure. (Infrastructure covers the costs of general management, planning,
finance, accounting, legal, and government affairs.)
The firm’s task is to examine its costs and performance in each value-creating activity and look
for ways to improve it. Managers should estimate competitors’ costs and performances as
benchmarks against which to compare their own. And they should go further and study the “best
of class” practices of the world’s best companies. We can identify best-practice companies by consulting customers, suppliers, distributors, financial analysts, trade associations, and magazines to
see whom they rate as doing the best job. Even the best companies can benchmark, against other
industries if necessary, to improve their performance. To support its corporate goal to be more
innovative, GE has benchmarked against P&G as well as developing its own best practices.4
The firm’s success depends not only on how well each department performs its work, but also
on how well the company coordinates departmental activities to conduct core business processes.5
These processes include:
•
•
•
•
•

The market-sensing process. All the activities in gathering and acting upon information
about the market
The new-offering realization process. All the activities in researching, developing, and
launching new high-quality offerings quickly and within budget
The customer acquisition process. All the activities in defining target markets and prospecting
for new customers
The customer relationship management process. All the activities in building deeper
understanding, relationships, and offerings to individual customers
The fulfillment management process. All the activities in receiving and approving orders,
shipping the goods on time, and collecting payment

Strong companies are reengineering their work flows and building cross-functional teams to be
responsible for each process.6 At Xerox, a Customer Operations Group links sales, shipping, installation, service, and billing so these activities flow smoothly into one another. Winning companies excel
at managing core business processes through cross-functional teams. AT&T, LexisNexis, and Pratt &
Whitney have reorganized their employees into cross-functional teams; cross-functional teams exist
in nonprofit and government organizations as well.
To be successful, a firm also needs to look for competitive advantages beyond its own operations, into the value chains of suppliers, distributors, and customers. Many companies today have

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

35

Pratt & Whitney employs crossfunctional employee teams to
build its products, such as this
4000 series aircraft engine.

Sony

partnered with specific suppliers and distributors to create a superior value delivery network, also
called a supply chain.

Sony In May 2009, Sony announced it would cut its number of suppliers in half over the

next two years (to 1,200), increasing the volume of parts and materials from each and thus reducing unit costs and overall procurement spending. Some stock analysts received the news positively
as evidence of the company’s commitment to restructuring. Others were less optimistic, such as
Mizuho Investors Securities analyst Nobuo Kurahashi: “I’m not sure how effective this is because
it’s just operational streamlining and wouldn’t simply push up earnings or bear fruit immediately.”7

Core Competencies
Traditionally, companies owned and controlled most of the resources that entered their businesses—
labor power, materials, machines, information, and energy—but many today outsource less-critical
resources if they can obtain better quality or lower cost.
The key, then, is to own and nurture the resources and competencies that make up the essence of
the business. Many textile, chemical, and computer/electronic product firms do not manufacture
their own products because offshore manufacturers are more competent in this task. Instead, they
focus on product design and development and marketing, their core competencies. A core competency has three characteristics: (1) It is a source of competitive advantage and makes a significant
contribution to perceived customer benefits. (2) It has applications in a wide variety of markets.
(3) It is difficult for competitors to imitate.8
Competitive advantage also accrues to companies that possess distinctive capabilities or excellence in broader business processes. Wharton’s George Day sees market-driven organizations as
excelling in three distinctive capabilities: market sensing, customer linking, and channel bonding.9
In terms of market sensing, he believes tremendous opportunities and threats often begin as “weak
signals” from the “periphery” of a business.10 He offers a systematic process for developing peripheral vision, and practical tools and strategies for building “vigilant organizations” attuned to
changes in the environment, by asking three questions each related to learning from the past,
evaluating the present, and envisioning the future.
Competitive advantage ultimately derives from how well the company has fitted its core competencies and distinctive capabilities into tightly interlocking “activity systems.” Competitors find it hard to
imitate Southwest Airlines, Walmart, and IKEA because they are unable to copy their activity systems.

36

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Business realignment may be necessary to maximize core competencies. It has three steps:
(1) (re)defining the business concept or “big idea”, (2) (re)shaping the business scope, and (3) (re)positioning the company’s brand identity. Consider what Kodak is doing to realign its business.

Kodak

With the advent of the digital era and the capacity to store, share, and print photos using PCs, Kodak faces more competition than ever, in-store and online. In 2004, after being
bumped from the Dow Jones Industrial Average where it had held a spot for more than 70 years,
the company started the painful process of transformation. It began by expanding its line of
digital cameras, printers, and other equipment, and it also set out to increase market share in the
lucrative medical imaging business. Making shifts is not without challenges, however. The company
eliminated almost 30,000 jobs between 2004 and 2007 and acquired a string of companies for its graphics
communications unit. In 2006, Kodak announced it would outsource the
making of its digital cameras. Not only must Kodak convince consumers to
buy its digital cameras and home printers, but it also must become known
as the most convenient and affordable way to process digital images. So far,
it faces steep competition from Sony, Canon, and Hewlett-Packard.11

A Holistic Marketing Orientation
and Customer Value

Kodak has installed thousands of
its Picture Kiosks to allow
customers to print digital photos
or scan existing photos when,
where, and how they want.

One view of holistic marketing sees it as “integrating the value exploration, value creation, and value delivery activities with the purpose
of building long-term, mutually satisfying relationships and coprosperity among key stakeholders.”12 Holistic marketers thus succeed by
managing a superior value chain that delivers a high level of product
quality, service, and speed. They achieve profitable growth by expanding customer share, building
customer loyalty, and capturing customer lifetime value. Holistic marketers address three key
management questions:
1.
2.
3.

Value exploration—How a company identifies new value opportunities
Value creation—How a company efficiently creates more promising new value offerings
Value delivery—How a company uses its capabilities and infrastructure to deliver the new
value offerings more efficiently

The Central Role of Strategic Planning
Successful marketing thus requires capabilities such as understanding, creating, delivering, capturing, and sustaining customer value. Only a select group of companies have historically stood out as
master marketers (see
Table 2.1). These companies focus on the customer and are organized to
respond effectively to changing customer needs. They all have well-staffed marketing departments,
and their other departments accept that the customer is king.
To ensure they select and execute the right activities, marketers must give priority to strategic
planning in three key areas: (1) managing a company’s businesses as an investment portfolio,
(2) assessing each business’s strength by considering the market’s growth rate and the company’s
position and fit in that market, and (3) establishing a strategy. The company must develop a game
plan for achieving each business’s long-run objectives.
Most large companies consist of four organizational levels: (1) corporate, (2) division, (3) business unit, and (4) product. Corporate headquarters is responsible for designing a corporate
strategic plan to guide the whole enterprise; it makes decisions on the amount of resources to allocate to each division, as well as on which businesses to start or eliminate. Each division establishes
a plan covering the allocation of funds to each business unit within the division. Each business unit
develops a strategic plan to carry that business unit into a profitable future. Finally, each product
level (product line, brand) develops a marketing plan for achieving its objectives.
The marketing plan is the central instrument for directing and coordinating the marketing
effort. It operates at two levels: strategic and tactical. The strategic marketing plan lays out the

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

TABLE 2.1

Some Examples of Master Marketers

Amazon.com
Bang & Olufsen

Electrolux

Progressive Insurance

Enterprise Rent-A-Car

Ritz-Carlton

Barnes & Noble
Best Buy
BMW
Borders
Canon
Caterpillar
Club Med
Costco
Disney
eBay

Google
Harley-Davidson
Honda
IKEA
LEGO
McDonald’s
Nike
Nokia
Nordstrom
Procter & Gamble

Samsung
Sony
Southwest Airlines
Starbucks
Target
Tesco
Toyota
Virgin
Walmart
Whole Foods

Planning

Implementing

Controlling

Corporate planning

Organizing

Measuring results

Division planning

Implementing
Diagnosing results

Business planning
Product planning

Taking corrective
action

target markets and the firm’s value proposition, based on an analysis of the best market opportunities. The tactical marketing plan specifies the marketing tactics, including product features,
promotion, merchandising, pricing, sales channels, and service. The complete planning, implementation, and control cycle of strategic planning is shown in
Figure 2.1. Next, we consider
planning at each of these four levels of the organization.

Corporate and Division Strategic
Planning
Some corporations give their business units freedom to set their own sales and profit goals
and strategies. Others set goals for their business units but let them develop their own strategies.
Still others set the goals and participate in developing individual business unit strategies.
All corporate headquarters undertake four planning activities:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Defining the corporate mission
Establishing strategic business units
Assigning resources to each strategic business unit
Assessing growth opportunities
We’ll briefly look at each process.

| CHAPTER 2

37

|Fig. 2.1|

The Strategic
Planning,
Implementation, and
Control Processes

38

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Defining the Corporate Mission
An organization exists to accomplish something: to make cars, lend money, provide a night’s lodging. Over time, the mission may change, to take advantage of new opportunities or respond to new
market conditions. Amazon.com changed its mission from being the world’s largest online bookstore to aspiring to become the world’s largest online store; eBay changed from running online
auctions for collectors to running online auctions of all kinds of goods; and Dunkin’ Donuts
switched its emphasis from doughnuts to coffee.
To define its mission, a company should address Peter Drucker’s classic questions:13 What
is our business? Who is the customer? What is of value to the customer? What will our business
be? What should our business be? These simple-sounding questions are among the most
difficult a company will ever have to answer. Successful companies continuously raise and
answer them.
Organizations develop mission statements to share with managers, employees, and (in many
cases) customers. A clear, thoughtful mission statement provides a shared sense of purpose, direction, and opportunity.
Mission statements are at their best when they reflect a vision, an almost “impossible dream”
that provides direction for the next 10 to 20 years. Sony’s former president, Akio Morita, wanted
everyone to have access to “personal portable sound,” so his company created the Walkman and
portable CD player. Fred Smith wanted to deliver mail anywhere in the United States before 10:30 AM
the next day, so he created FedEx.
Good mission statements have five major characteristics.
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

They focus on a limited number of goals. The statement “We want to produce the highestquality products, offer the most service, achieve the widest distribution, and sell at the lowest
prices” claims too much.
They stress the company’s major policies and values. They narrow the range of individual
discretion so employees act consistently on important issues.
They define the major competitive spheres within which the company will operate.
Table 2.2
summarizes some key competitive dimensions for mission statements.
They take a long-term view. Management should change the mission only when it ceases
to be relevant.
They are as short, memorable, and meaningful as possible. Marketing consultant Guy
Kawasaki advocates developing three- to four-word corporate mantras rather than mission
statements, like “Enriching Women’s Lives” for Mary Kay.14

Compare the rather vague mission statements on the left with Google’s mission statement and philosophy on the right:

To build total brand value by innovating to deliver
customer value and customer leadership faster,
better, and more completely than our competition.

Google Mission
To organize the world’s information and make it
universally accessible and useful.

We build brands and make the world a little
happier by bringing our best to you.

Google Philosophy
Never settle for the best.
1. Focus on the user and all else will follow.
2. It’s best to do one thing really, really well.
3. Fast is better than slow.
4. Democracy on the Web works.
5. You don’t need to be at your desk to need
an answer.
6. You can make money without doing evil.
7. There is always more information out there.
8. The need for information crosses all borders.
9. You can be serious without a suit.
10. Great just isn’t good enough.15

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

TABLE 2.2

Defining Competitive Territory and Boundaries
in Mission Statements

• Industry. Some companies operate in only one industry; some only in a set of related industries;
some only in industrial goods, consumer goods, or services; and some in any industry.
• Caterpillar focuses on the industrial market; John Deere operates in the industrial and
consumer markets.
• Products and applications. Firms define the range of products and applications they will
supply.
• St. Jude Medical is “dedicated to developing medical technology and services that put more
control in the hands of physicians, and that advance the practice of medicine and contribute
to successful outcomes for every patient.”
• Competence. The firm identifies the range of technological and other core competencies it will
master and leverage.
• Japan’s NEC has built its core competencies in computing, communications, and components
to support production of laptop computers, television receivers, and handheld telephones.
• Market segment. The type of market or customers a company will serve is the market
segment.
• Aston Martin makes only high-performance sports cars. Gerber serves primarily the baby
market.
• Vertical. The vertical sphere is the number of channel levels, from raw material to final product
and distribution, in which a company will participate.
• At one extreme are companies with a large vertical scope. American Apparel dyes, designs,
sews, markets, and distributes its line of clothing apparel out of a single building in downtown
Los Angeles.
• At the other extreme are “hollow corporations,” which outsource the production of nearly
all goods and services to suppliers. Metro International prints 34 free local newspaper
editions in 16 countries. It employs few reporters and owns no printing presses; instead
it purchases its articles from other news sources and outsources all its printing and much
of its distribution to third parties.16
• Geographical. The range of regions, countries, or country groups in which a company will
operate defines its geographical sphere.
• Some companies operate in a specific city or state. Others are multinationals like Deutsche
Post DHL and Royal Dutch/Shell, which each operate in more than 100 countries.

Establishing Strategic Business Units
Companies often define themselves in terms of products: They are in the “auto business” or the
“clothing business.” Market definitions of a business, however, describe the business as a customersatisfying process. Products are transient; basic needs and customer groups endure forever.
Transportation is a need: the horse and carriage, automobile, railroad, airline, ship, and truck are
products that meet that need.
Viewing businesses in terms of customer needs can suggest additional growth opportunities.
Table 2.3 lists companies that have moved from a product to a market definition of their business. It highlights the difference between a target market definition and a strategic market definition.
A target market definition tends to focus on selling a product or service to a current market.
Pepsi could define its target market as everyone who drinks carbonated soft drinks, and competitors would therefore be other carbonated soft drink companies. A strategic market definition,
however, also focuses on the potential market. If Pepsi considered everyone who might drink something to quench their thirst, its competition would include noncarbonated soft drinks, bottled
water, fruit juices, tea, and coffee. To better compete, Pepsi might decide to sell additional beverages
with promising growth rates.
A business can define itself in terms of three dimensions: customer groups, customer needs, and
technology.17 Consider a small company that defines its business as designing incandescent lighting

| CHAPTER 2

39

40

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

American Apparel is a fully
vertically integrated company
that conducts all its business
from its Los Angeles,
California, location.

systems for television studios. Its customer group is television studios; the customer need is lighting; the technology is incandescent lighting. The company might want to expand to make lighting
for homes, factories, and offices, or it could supply other services television studios need, such as
heating, ventilation, or air conditioning. It could design other lighting technologies for television

TABLE 2.3

Product-Oriented versus Market-Oriented Definitions of a Business

Company

Product Definition

Market Definition

Union Pacific Railroad

We run a railroad.

We are a people-and-goods mover.

Xerox

We make copying equipment.

We help improve office productivity.

Hess Corporation

We sell gasoline.

We supply energy.

Paramount Pictures

We make movies.

We market entertainment.

Encyclopaedia Britannica
Carrier

We sell encyclopedias.
We make air conditioners and furnaces.

We distribute information.
We provide climate control in the home.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

41

The Kate Spade brand allows Liz
Claiborne to attract a more youthful customer.

studios, such as infrared or ultraviolet lighting or perhaps environmentally friendly “green”
fluorescent bulbs.
Large companies normally manage quite different businesses, each requiring its own strategy.
At one time, General Electric classified its businesses into 49 strategic business units (SBUs). An
SBU has three characteristics:
1.
2.
3.

It is a single business, or a collection of related businesses, that can be planned separately from
the rest of the company.
It has its own set of competitors.
It has a manager responsible for strategic planning and profit performance, who controls most
of the factors affecting profit.

News Corp.

The purpose of identifying the company’s strategic business units is to develop separate strategies and assign appropriate funding. Senior management knows its portfolio of businesses usually
includes a number of “yesterday’s has-beens” as well as “tomorrow’s breadwinners.”18 Liz Claiborne
has put more emphasis on some of its younger businesses such as Juicy Couture, Lucky Brand
Jeans, Mexx, and Kate Spade while selling businesses without the same buzz (Ellen Tracy, Sigrid
Olsen, and Laundry). Campbell Soup has out-paced the stock market for close to a decade by
developing or keeping only products that ranked number one or number two in the categories of
simple meals, baked snacks, and veggie-based drinks and that had a strong emphasis on value,
nutrition, and convenience.19

News Corp.

Media conglomerate News Corp.’s vast empire encompasses virtually all aspects of print and broadcast media (see
Table 2.4). The economic recession of
2008–2009 had different effects on each. Hit hard were its broadcast television business.
Even though the Fox network retained popular shows like American Idol, lower ratings and
advertising sales took their toll. The cable network business, whose revenue is more stable
due to lower ad rates and monthly provider fees, was a bright spot; profits actually grew. A continued
slump in the newspaper and magazine business led the firm to start charging reader fees for all its news
Web sites. News Corp.’s $650 million investment in MySpace in 2005 continued to falter as the social
network site struggled to attract advertisers. At the same time, free online video service Hulu began to hit
its stride, and News Corp. remained committed to a strong online presence. The goal? To develop hit TV
shows and movies that would drive DVD sales and lead to streaming shows over the Internet, and eventually to products downloadable to mobile phones.20

42

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

News Corp. Business Units

TABLE 2.4

Newspapers ($4.5 Billion): New York Post, Wall Street Journal, The Sun (UK)
Magazines ($1 Billion): Weekly Standard, TV Guide
Book Publishing ($1.3 Billion): HarperCollins
Broadcast TV ($5.7 Billion): Fox Network, WNYW New York, KTTV Los Angeles
Cable Networks ($4 Billion): FX, FSN, Fox News Channel
Satellite Television ($3 Billion): Sky Italia, BSkyB, Tata Sky
Filmed Entertainment ($6.7 Billion): 20th Century Fox, Fox Searchlight Pictures, Blue Sky Studios
Other ($2.3 Billion): MySpace, IGN Entertainment, Jamba, Hulu

Assigning Resources to Each SBU21
Once it has defined SBUs, management must decide how to allocate corporate resources to each.
Several portfolio-planning models provide ways to make investment decisions. The GE/McKinsey
Matrix classifies each SBU by the extent of its competitive advantage and the attractiveness of its
industry. Management can decide to grow, “harvest” or draw cash from, or hold on to the business.
Another model, BCG’s Growth-Share Matrix, uses relative market share and annual rate of market
growth as criteria to make investment decisions, classifying SBUs as dogs, cash cows, question
marks, and stars.
Portfolio-planning models like these have fallen out of favor as oversimplified and subjective.
Newer methods rely on shareholder value analysis, and on whether the market value of a company
is greater with an SBU or without it (whether it is sold or spun off). These value calculations assess
the potential of a business based on growth opportunities from global expansion, repositioning or
retargeting, and strategic outsourcing.

Assessing Growth Opportunities
Assessing growth opportunities includes planning new businesses, downsizing, and terminating
older businesses. If there is a gap between future desired sales and projected sales, corporate
management will need to develop or acquire new businesses to fill it.
Figure 2.2 illustrates this strategic-planning gap for a major manufacturer of blank compact
disks called Musicale (name disguised). The lowest curve projects the expected sales over the next
five years from the current business portfolio. The highest describes desired sales over the same
period. Evidently, the company wants to grow much faster than its current businesses will permit.
How can it fill the strategic-planning gap?
The first option is to identify opportunities for growth within current businesses (intensive
opportunities). The second is to identify opportunities to build or acquire businesses related to

|Fig. 2.2|

Desired
sales

Diversification

growth

Strategic-Planning
Gap

Integrative growth

Sales ($ millions)

The Strategic-Planning
Gap

Intensive growth

Current
portfolio

0

1

2

3
Time (years)

4

5

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

43

current businesses (integrative opportunities). The third is to identify opportunities to add attractive unrelated businesses (diversification opportunities).

INTENSIVE GROWTH Corporate management’s first course of action should be a review of
opportunities for improving existing businesses. One useful framework for detecting new intensivegrowth opportunities is a “product-market expansion grid.” It considers the strategic growth
opportunities for a firm in terms of current and new products and markets.
The company first considers whether it could gain more market share with its current products in their current markets, using a market-penetration strategy. Next it considers whether it
can find or develop new markets for its current products, in a market-development strategy. Then
it considers whether it can develop new products of potential interest to its current markets with
a product-development strategy. Later the firm will also review opportunities to develop new
products for new markets in a diversification strategy. Consider how ESPN has employed
growth opportunities.22

ESPN

ESPN (the Entertainment and Sports Programming Network) was launched in 1978 in Bristol, Connecticut,
with a single satellite, broadcasting regional sports and
obscure international sporting contests such as the “World’s
Strongest Man.” Through its singular focus on providing
sports programming and news, it grew into the biggest name in sports. In
the early 1990s, the company crafted a well-thought-out plan: wherever
sports fans watched, read, and discussed sports, ESPN would be there. It
pursued this strategy by expanding its brand into a number of new categories and by 2009 encompassed 10 cable channels, a Web site, a
magazine, a restaurant chain (ESPN Zone), more than 600 local radio
affiliates, original movies and television series, book publishing, a sports
merchandise catalog and online store, music and video games, and a
mobile service. ESPN continues to expand its brand footprint. Its failed
seven-month foray into the fiercely competitive cell phone market in 2006
left it undaunted. It transitioned from a service provider to a content
provider in 2007 and partnered with Verizon Wireless to launch ESPN MVP. Now owned by The Walt Disney
Company, ESPN earns $5 billion a year in revenue, but perhaps the greatest tribute to the power of its
brand came from one male focus group respondent: “If ESPN was a woman, I’d marry her.”

So how might Musicale use these three major intensive growth strategies to increase its sales? It
could try to encourage its current customers to buy more by demonstrating the benefits of using
compact disks for data storage in addition to music storage. It could try to attract competitors’ customers if it noticed major weaknesses in their products or marketing programs. Finally, Musicale
could try to convince nonusers of compact disks to start using them.
How can Musicale use a market-development strategy? First, it might try to identify potential
user groups in the current sales areas. If it has been selling compact disks only to consumer markets, it might go after office and factory markets. Second, it might seek additional distribution
channels by adding mass merchandising or online channels. Third, the company might sell in new
locations in its home country or abroad.
Management should also consider new-product possibilities. Musicale could develop new
features, such as additional data storage capabilities or greater durability. It could offer the CD at
two or more quality levels, or it could research an alternative technology such as flash drives.
These intensive growth strategies offer several ways to grow. Still, that growth may not be
enough, and management must also look for integrative growth opportunities.

INTEGRATIVE GROWTH A business can increase sales and profits through backward, forward, or horizontal integration within its industry. Merck has gone beyond developing and
selling prescription pharmaceuticals. It formed joint ventures in 1989 with Johnson & Johnson

ESPN has entered a wide range of
sports-related businesses, including
its sports-themed ESPN Zone
restaurant, to connect with its
customers in more ways and
places.

44

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

to sell over-the-counter pharmaceuticals; in 1991 with DuPont to expand basic research, and
in 2000 with Schering-Plough to develop and market new prescription medicines. In 1997,
Merck and Rhône-Poulenc S.A. (now Sanofi-Aventis S.A.) combined their animal health and
poultry genetics businesses to form Merial Limited, a fully integrated animal health company.
Finally, Merck purchased Medco, a mail-order pharmaceutical distributor, in 2003 and Sirna
Therapeutics in 2006.
Horizontal mergers and alliances don’t always work out. The merger between Sears and Kmart
didn’t solve either retailer’s problems.23 Media companies, however, have long reaped the benefits
of integrative growth. Here’s how one business writer explains the potential NBC could reap from
its merger with Vivendi Universal Entertainment to become NBC Universal. Although it’s a farfetched example, it gets across the possibilities inherent in this growth strategy:24
[When] the hit movie Fast & Furious 4 (produced by Universal Pictures) comes to television, it would air on Bravo (owned by NBC) or USA Network (owned by Universal),
followed by the inevitable bid to make the movie into a TV series (by Universal Television
Group), with the pilot being picked up by NBC. The show then
begins airing on Hulu.com (owned in part by NBC), and ultimately leads to the creation of a popular amusement-park
attraction at Universal Studios.
How might Musicale achieve integrative growth? The company
might acquire one or more of its suppliers, such as plastic material
producers, to gain more control or generate more profit through
backward integration. It might acquire some wholesalers or retailers,
especially if they are highly profitable, in forward integration.
Finally, Musicale might acquire one or more competitors, provided
the government does not bar this horizontal integration. However,
these new sources may still not deliver the desired sales volume. In
that case, the company must consider diversification.
In today’s highly integrated media
world, NBC Universal may take a
successful movie franchise such as
Fast & Furious and leverage it
across all its businesses, including
its Universal Studios theme park.

DIVERSIFICATION GROWTH Diversification growth makes sense when good opportunities exist outside the present businesses—the industry is highly attractive and the company has the
right mix of business strengths to succeed. From its origins as an animated film producer, The Walt
Disney Company has moved into licensing characters for merchandised goods, publishing general
interest fiction books under the Hyperion imprint, entering the broadcast industry with its own
Disney Channel as well as ABC and ESPN, developing theme parks and vacation and resort properties, and offering cruise and commercial theatre experiences.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

Several types of diversification are possible for Musicale. First, the company could choose a concentric strategy and seek new products that have technological or marketing synergies with existing
product lines, though appealing to a different group of customers. It might start a laser disk manufacturing operation, because it knows how to manufacture compact discs. Second, it might use a
horizontal strategy to search for unrelated new products that appeal to current customers. Musicale
might produce compact disc cases, for example, though they require a different manufacturing process.
Finally, the company might seek new businesses that have no relationship to its current technology,
products, or markets, adopting a conglomerate strategy to consider making application software or
personal organizers.

DOWNSIZING AND DIVESTING OLDER BUSINESSES Companies must carefully prune, harvest, or divest tired old businesses to release needed resources for other
uses and reduce costs. To focus on its travel and credit card operations, American Express
in 2005 spun off American Express Financial Advisors, which provided insurance, mutual
funds, investment advice, and brokerage and asset management services (it was renamed
Ameriprise Financial).

Organization and Organizational Culture
Strategic planning happens within the context of the organization. A company’s organization consists of its structures, policies, and corporate culture, all of which can become dysfunctional in a
rapidly changing business environment. Whereas managers can change structures and policies
(though with difficulty), the company’s culture is very hard to change. Yet adapting the culture is
often the key to successfully implementing a new strategy.
What exactly is a corporate culture? Some define it as “the shared experiences, stories, beliefs,
and norms that characterize an organization.” Walk into any company and the first thing that
strikes you is the corporate culture—the way people dress, talk to one another, and greet customers.
When Mark Hurd became CEO of HP, one of his goals was to reinvigorate the famous “HP Way,” a
benevolent but hard-nosed corporate culture that rewarded employees amply but expected teamwork, growth, and profits in return.25
A customer-centric culture can affect all aspects of an organization. Sometimes corporate
culture develops organically and is transmitted directly from the CEO’s personality and habits
to the company employees. Mike Lazaridis, president and co-CEO of BlackBerry producer
Research In Motion, is a scientist in his own right, winning an Academy Award for technical
achievement in film. He has hosted a weekly, innovation-centered “Vision Series” at company
headquarters that focuses on new research and company goals. As he states, “I think we have a
culture of innovation here, and [engineers] have absolute access to me. I live a life that tries to
promote innovation.”26

Marketing Innovation
Innovation in marketing is critical. Imaginative ideas on strategy exist in many places within a
company.27 Senior management should identify and encourage fresh ideas from three underrepresented groups: employees with youthful or diverse perspectives, employees far removed from
company headquarters, and employees new to the industry. Each group can challenge company
orthodoxy and stimulate new ideas.
German-based Reckitt Benckiser has been an innovator in the staid household cleaning products industry by generating 40 percent of sales from products under three years old. Its
multinational staff is encouraged to dig deep into consumer habits and is well rewarded for excellent performance. “Marketing Insight: Creating Innovative Marketing” describes how some leading
companies approach innovation.
Firms develop strategy by identifying and selecting among different views of the future. The
Royal Dutch/Shell Group has pioneered scenario analysis, which develops plausible representations of a firm’s possible future using assumptions about forces driving the market and different
uncertainties. Managers think through each scenario with the question, “What will we do if it happens?” adopt one scenario as the most probable, and watch for signposts that might confirm or
disconfirm it.28 Consider the challenges faced by the movie industry.

| CHAPTER 2

45

46

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Marketing Insight
Creating Innovative Marketing
When IBM surveyed top CEOs and government leaders about their priorities, business-model innovation and coming up with unique ways of
doing things scored high. IBM’s own drive for business-model innovation led to much collaboration, both within IBM itself and externally
with companies, governments, and educational institutions. CEO
Samuel Palmisano noted how the breakthrough Cell processor, based
on the company’s Power architecture, would not have happened without
collaboration with Sony and Nintendo, as well as competitors Toshiba
and Microsoft.
Procter & Gamble (P&G) similarly has made it a goal for 50 percent
of new products to come from outside P&G’s labs—from inventors, scientists, and suppliers whose new-product ideas can be developed in-house.
Business guru Jim Collins’s research emphasizes the importance
of systematic, broad-based innovation: “Always looking for the one big
breakthrough, the one big idea, is contrary to what we found: To build a
truly great company, it’s decision upon decision, action upon action, day
upon day, month upon month. . . . It’s cumulative momentum and no
one decision defines a great company.” He cites the success of Walt

TABLE 2.5

Disney with theme parks and Walmart with retailing as examples of
companies that were successful after having executed against a big
idea brilliantly over such a long period of time.
Northwestern’s Mohanbir Sawhney and his colleagues outline 12
dimensions of business innovation that make up the “innovation radar”
(see
Table 2.5) and suggest that business innovation is about
increasing customer value, not just creating new things; comes in
many flavors and can take place on any dimension of a business system; and is systematic and requires careful consideration of all aspects
of a business.
Finally, to find breakthrough ideas, some companies find ways to
immerse a range of employees in solving marketing problems.
Samsung’s Value Innovation Program (VIP) isolates product development teams of engineers, designers, and planners with a timetable and
end date in the company’s center just south of Seoul, Korea, while 50
specialists help guide their activities. To help make tough trade-offs,
team members draw “value curves” that rank attributes such as a product’s sound or picture quality on a scale from 1 to 5. To develop a new
car, BMW similarly mobilizes specialists in engineering, design, production, marketing, purchasing, and finance at its Research and Innovation
Center or Project House.
Sources: Steve Hamm, “Innovation: The View from the Top,” BusinessWeek,
April 3, 2006, pp. 52–53; Jena McGregor, “The World’s Most Innovative
Companies,” BusinessWeek, April 24, 2006, pp. 63–74; Rich Karlgard, “Digital
Rules,” Forbes, March 13, 2006, p. 31; Jennifer Rooney and Jim Collins, “Being
Great Is Not Just a Matter of Big Ideas,” Point, June 2006, p. 20; Moon Ihlwan,
“Camp Samsung,” BusinessWeek, July 3, 2006, pp. 46–47; Mohanbir Sawhney,
Robert C. Wolcott, and Inigo Arroniz, “The 12 Different Ways for Companies to
Innovate,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring 2006), pp. 75–85.

The 12 Dimensions of Business Innovation

Dimension

Definition

Examples

Offerings (WHAT)

Develop innovative new products or services.

• Gillette MACH3 Turbo Razor
• Apple iPod music player and iTunes music
service

Platform

Use common components or building blocks to
create derivative offerings.
Create integrated and customized offerings that
solve end-to-end customer problems.

• General Motors OnStar telematics platform
• Disney animated movies
• UPS logistics services Supply Chain
Solutions
• DuPont Building Innovations for construction

Customers (WHO)

Discover unmet customer needs or identify
underserved customer segments.

• Enterprise Rent-A-Car focus on replacement
car renters
• Green Mountain Energy focus on “green
power”

Customer Experience

Redesign customer interactions across all touch
points and all moments of contact.

• Washington Mutual Occasio retail banking
concept
• Cabela’s “store as entertainment
experience” concept

Solutions

(Continued)

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

47

• Google paid search
• Blockbuster revenue sharing with movie
distributors
• Toyota Production System for operations
• General Electric Design for Six Sigma (DFSS)

Value Capture

Redefine how company gets paid or create
innovative new revenue streams.

Processes (HOW)

Redesign core operating processes to improve
efficiency and effectiveness.

Organization

Change form, function, or activity scope
of the firm.

• Cisco partner-centric networked virtual
organization
• Procter & Gamble front-back hybrid
organization for customer focus

Supply Chain

Think differently about sourcing and fulfillment.

• Moen ProjectNet for collaborative design
with suppliers
• General Motors Celta use of integrated
supply and online sales

Presence (WHERE)

Create new distribution channels or innovative
points of presence, including the places where
offerings can be bought or used by customers.

• Starbucks music CD sales in coffee stores
• Diebold RemoteTeller System for banking

Networking

Create network-centric intelligent and
integrated offerings.

• Otis Remote Elevator Monitoring service
• Department of Defense Network-Centric
Warfare

Brand

Leverage a brand into new domains.

• Virgin Group “branded venture capital”
• Yahoo! as a lifestyle brand

Source: Mohanbir Sawhney, Robert C. Wolcott, and Inigo Arroniz, “The 12 Different Ways for Companies to Innovate,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring 2006), p. 78. © 2006 by Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. All rights reserved. Distributed by Tribune Media Services.

Movie Industry The success of Netflix (see Chapter 15) and the ease of watching longer-form entertainment or playing games on broadband Internet helped produce a
6.8 percent decrease in DVD sales—one that experts believe will continue. The recent emergence
of Redbox and its thousands of kiosks renting movies for $1 a day poses yet another threat to the
movie business and DVD sales. Film studios clearly need to prepare for
the day when films are primarily sold not through physical distribution but
through satellite and cable companies’ video-on-demand services. Although
studios make 70 percent on a typical $4.99 cable viewing versus 30 percent
on the sale of a DVD, sales of DVDs still generate 70 percent of film profits.
To increase electronic distribution without destroying their DVD business,
studios are experimenting with new approaches. Some, such as Warner
Bros., are releasing a DVD at the same time as online and cable versions of
a movie. Disney has emphasized its parent-friendly Disney-branded films,
which generate higher DVD sales and are easy to cross-promote at the company’s theme parks, on its TV channels, and in its stores. Paramount chose to
debut Jackass 2.5 on Blockbuster’s site for free to create buzz and interest.
Film studios are considering all possible scenarios as they rethink their business model in a world where the DVD no longer will reign as king.29
The easy availability of rentals
from Redbox kiosks has film studios rethinking their pricing and
distribution strategies.

Business Unit Strategic Planning
The business unit strategic-planning process consists of the steps shown in
examine each step in the sections that follow.

Figure 2.3. We

48

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

External
environment
(opportunity &
threat analysis)
Business
mission

SWOT analysis

Goal
formulation

Strategy
formulation

Program
formulation

Implementation

Feedback
and
control

Internal
environment
(strengths/
weaknesses analysis)

|Fig. 2.3|

The Business Unit
Strategic-Planning
Process

The Business Mission
Each business unit needs to define its specific mission within the broader company mission. Thus, a
television-studio-lighting-equipment company might define its mission as, “To target major television studios and become their vendor of choice for lighting technologies that represent the most
advanced and reliable studio lighting arrangements.” Notice this mission does not attempt to win
business from smaller television studios, offer the lowest price, or venture into nonlighting products.

SWOT Analysis
The overall evaluation of a company’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats is called
SWOT analysis. It’s a way of monitoring the external and internal marketing environment.

EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT (OPPORTUNITY AND THREAT) ANALYSIS A business unit must monitor key macroenvironment forces and significant microenvironment factors that
affect its ability to earn profits. It should set up a marketing intelligence system to track trends and
important developments and any related opportunities and threats.
Good marketing is the art of finding, developing, and profiting from these opportunities.30
A marketing opportunity is an area of buyer need and interest that a company has a high probability of profitably satisfying. There are three main sources of market opportunities.31 The first is to
offer something that is in short supply. This requires little marketing talent, as the need is fairly
obvious. The second is to supply an existing product or service in a new or superior way. How? The
problem detection method asks consumers for their suggestions, the ideal method has them imagine
an ideal version of the product or service, and the consumption chain method asks them to chart
their steps in acquiring, using, and disposing of a product. This last method often leads to a totally
new product or service.
Marketers need to be good at spotting opportunities. Consider the following:
•

•
•
•

•

•
•

A company may benefit from converging industry trends and introduce hybrid products or
services that are new to the market. Major cell manufacturers have released phones with
digital photo and video capabilities, and Global Positioning Systems (GPS).
A company may make a buying process more convenient or efficient. Consumers can use the
Internet to find more books than ever and search for the lowest price with a few clicks.
A company can meet the need for more information and advice. Angie’s List connects individuals with local home improvement contractors and doctors that have been reviewed by others.
A company can customize a product or service. Timberland allows customers to choose colors
for different sections of their boots, add initials or numbers to their boots, and choose different
stitching and embroidery.
A company can introduce a new capability. Consumers can create and edit digital “iMovies”
with the iMac and upload them to an Apple Web server or Web site such as YouTube to share
with friends around the world.
A company may be able to deliver a product or service faster. FedEx discovered a way to
deliver mail and packages much more quickly than the U.S. Post Office.
A company may be able to offer a product at a much lower price. Pharmaceutical firms have
created generic versions of brand-name drugs, and mail-order drug companies often sell for less.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

(a) Opportunity Matrix

Attractiveness

Success Probability
High

Low

High

1

2

Low

3

4

1. Company develops more powerful
lighting system
2. Company develops device to
measure energy efficiency
of any lighting system
3. Company develops device to
measure illumination level
4. Company develops software program
to teach lighting fundamentals to
TV studio personnel
(b) Threat Matrix

Probability of Occurrence

Seriousness

High

Low

High

1

2

Low

3

4

1. Competitor develops superior
lighting system
2. Major prolonged economic
depression
3. Higher costs
4. Legislation to reduce number
of TV studio licenses

To evaluate opportunities, companies can use market opportunity analysis (MOA) to ask
questions like:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Can we articulate the benefits convincingly to a defined target market(s)?
Can we locate the target market(s) and reach them with cost-effective media and trade channels?
Does our company possess or have access to the critical capabilities and resources we need to
deliver the customer benefits?
Can we deliver the benefits better than any actual or potential competitors?
Will the financial rate of return meet or exceed our required threshold for investment?

In the opportunity matrix in
Figure 2.4 (a), the best marketing opportunities facing
the TV-lighting-equipment company appear in the upper-left cell (#1). The opportunities in
the lower-right cell (#4) are too minor to consider. The opportunities in the upper-right cell (#2)
and the lower-left cell (#3) are worth monitoring in the event that any improve in attractiveness and potential.
An environmental threat is a challenge posed by an unfavorable trend or development that, in
the absence of defensive marketing action, would lead to lower sales or profit. Figure 2.4 (b) illustrates the threat matrix facing the TV-lighting-equipment company. The threats in the upper-left cell
are major, because they have a high probability of occurrence and can seriously hurt the company.
To deal with them, the company needs contingency plans. The threats in the lower-right cell are
minor and can be ignored. The firm will want to carefully monitor threats in the upper-right and
lower-left cells in the event they grow more serious.

INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT (STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES) ANALYSIS It’s one
thing to find attractive opportunities, and another to be able to take advantage of them. Each business needs to evaluate its internal strengths and weaknesses.

Loan Bright

At the Web site of Loan Bright, an online mortgage company,
potential homebuyers can get a personalized list of lenders and available terms. At first, Loan
Bright made its money by selling the homebuyer data to high-end mortgage lenders, including
Wells Fargo Home Mortgage, Bank of America Mortgage, and Chase Home Mortgage. These
firms turned the data into leads for their sales teams. But worrisome internal issues arose. For

| CHAPTER 2

|Fig. 2.4|

Opportunity and
Threat Matrices

49

50

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

one thing, Loan Bright had to please every one of its big
clients, yet each was becoming tougher to satisfy, eating up
time and resources. The company’s top managers gathered to analyze the market and Loan Bright’s strengths
and weaknesses. They decided that instead of serving a
few choice clients, they would serve many more individual loan officers who responded to the company’s Google
ads and only wanted to buy a few leads. The switch
required revamping the way Loan Bright salespeople
brought in new business, including using a one-page
contract instead of the old 12-page contract, and creating a separate customer service department.32

On the basis of a SWOT analysis,
online mortgage company Loan
Bright changed the focus of their
marketing efforts to target
individual loan officers.

Businesses can evaluate their own strengths and weaknesses by using a form like the one shown in “Marketing
Memo: Checklist for Performing Strengths/Weaknesses
Analysis.”
Clearly, the business doesn’t have to correct all its
weaknesses, nor should it gloat about all its strengths.
The big question is whether it should limit itself to those opportunities for which it possesses the
required strengths, or consider those that might require it to find or develop new strengths.
Managers at Texas Instruments (TI) were split between those who wanted to stick to industrial
electronics, where TI has clear strength, and those who wanted to continue introducing consumer
products, where TI lacks some required marketing strengths.

Goal Formulation
Once the company has performed a SWOT analysis, it can proceed to goal formulation, developing specific goals for the planning period. Goals are objectives that are specific with respect to
magnitude and time.
Most business units pursue a mix of objectives, including profitability, sales growth, market
share improvement, risk containment, innovation, and reputation. The business unit sets these
objectives and then manages by objectives (MBO). For an MBO system to work, the unit’s objectives must meet four criteria:
1.

2.
3.
4.

They must be arranged hierarchically, from most to least important. The business unit’s key
objective for the period may be to increase the rate of return on investment. Managers can
increase profit by increasing revenue and reducing expenses. They can grow revenue, in turn,
by increasing market share and prices.
Objectives should be quantitative whenever possible. The objective “to increase the return
on investment (ROI)” is better stated as the goal “to increase ROI to 15 percent within two years.”
Goals should be realistic. Goals should arise from an analysis of the business unit’s opportunities and strengths, not from wishful thinking.
Objectives must be consistent. It’s not possible to maximize sales and profits simultaneously.

Other important trade-offs include short-term profit versus long-term growth, deep penetration of existing markets versus development of new markets, profit goals versus nonprofit goals,
and high growth versus low risk. Each choice calls for a different marketing strategy.33
Many believe adopting the goal of strong market share growth may mean foregoing strong
short-term profits. Volkswagen has 15 times the annual revenue of Porsche—but Porsche’s profit
margins are seven times bigger than Volkswagen’s. Other successful companies such as Google,
Microsoft, and Samsung have maximized profitability and growth.

Strategic Formulation
Goals indicate what a business unit wants to achieve; strategy is a game plan for getting there.
Every business must design a strategy for achieving its goals, consisting of a marketing strategy and
a compatible technology strategy and sourcing strategy.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

51

PORTER’S GENERIC STRATEGIES Michael Porter has proposed three generic strategies that provide a good starting point for
strategic thinking: overall cost leadership, differentiation, and focus.34
•

•

•

Overall cost leadership. Firms work to achieve the lowest production and distribution costs so they can underprice competitors
and win market share. They need less skill in marketing. The
problem is that other firms will usually compete with still-lower
costs and hurt the firm that rested its whole future on cost.
Differentiation. The business concentrates on achieving superior performance in an important customer benefit area valued
by a large part of the market. The firm seeking quality leadership, for example, must make products with the best
components, put them together expertly, inspect them carefully,
and effectively communicate their quality.
Focus. The business focuses on one or more narrow market segments, gets to know them intimately, and pursues either cost
leadership or differentiation within the target segment.

The online air travel industry provides a good example of these three strategies: Travelocity is
pursuing a differentiation strategy by offering the most comprehensive range of services to the
traveler; Lowestfare is pursuing a lowest-cost strategy; and Last Minute is pursuing a niche strategy by focusing on travelers who have the flexibility to travel on very short notice. Some
companies use a hybrid approach.
According to Porter, firms directing the same strategy to the same target market constitute a
strategic group.35 The firm that carries out that strategy best will make the most profits. Circuit
City went out of business because it did not stand out in the consumer electronics industry as lowest in cost, highest in perceived value, or best in serving some market segment.
Porter draws a distinction between operational effectiveness and strategy. Competitors can quickly
copy the operationally effective company using benchmarking and other tools, thus diminishing the
advantage of operational effectiveness. Porter defines strategy as “the creation of a unique and valuable position involving a different set of activities.” A company can claim it has a strategy when it
“performs different activities from rivals or performs similar activities in different ways.”

STRATEGIC ALLIANCES Even giant companies—AT&T, Philips, and Nokia—often cannot
achieve leadership, either nationally or globally, without forming alliances with domestic or multinational companies that complement or leverage their capabilities and resources.
Just doing business in another country may require the firm to license its product, form a
joint venture with a local firm, or buy from local suppliers to meet “domestic content” requirements. Many firms have developed global strategic networks, and victory is going to those who
build the better global network. The Star Alliance brings together 21 airlines, including
Lufthansa, United Airlines, Singapore Airlines, Air New Zealand, and South Africa Airways, in a
huge global partnership that allows travelers to make nearly seamless connections to hundreds of
destinations.
Many strategic alliances take the form of marketing alliances. These fall into four major categories.
1.

2.

3.

4.

Product or service alliances—One company licenses another to produce its product, or two
companies jointly market their complementary products or a new product. The credit card
industry is a complicated combination of cards jointly marketed by banks such as Bank of
America, credit card companies such as Visa, and affinity companies such as Alaska Airlines.
Promotional alliances—One company agrees to carry a promotion for another company’s
product or service. McDonald’s teamed up with Disney for 10 years to offer products related
to current Disney films as part of its meals for children.
Logistics alliances—One company offers logistical services for another company’s product.
Warner Music Group and Sub Pop Records created the Alternative Distribution Alliance
(ADA) in 1993 as a joint venture to distribute and manufacture records owned by independent labels. ADA is the leading “indie” distribution company in the United States for both
physical and digital product.
Pricing collaborations—One or more companies join in a special pricing collaboration. Hotel
and rental car companies often offer mutual price discounts.

Customers can travel virtually
anywhere in the world via flights
on Star Alliance airlines.

52

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

marketing

Memo

Checklist for Performing Strengths/Weaknesses Analysis
Performance

Importance

Major
Strength

Minor
Strength

Neutral

Minor
Weakness

Major
Weakness

High

Med.

Low

Marketing
1. Company reputation
2. Market share
3. Customer satisfaction
4. Customer retention
5. Product quality
6. Service quality
7. Pricing effectiveness
8. Distribution effectiveness
9. Promotion effectiveness
10. Sales force effectiveness
11. Innovation effectiveness
12. Geographical coverage

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

Finance
13. Cost or availability of capital
14. Cash flow
15. Financial stability

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

Manufacturing
16. Facilities
17. Economies of scale
18. Capacity
19. Able, dedicated workforce
20. Ability to produce on time
21. Technical manufacturing skill

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

Organization
22. Visionary, capable leadership
23. Dedicated employees
24. Entrepreneurial orientation
25. Flexible or responsive

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____

Companies need to give creative thought to finding partners that might complement
their strengths and offset their weaknesses. Well-managed alliances allow companies to obtain a
greater sales impact at lower cost. To keep their strategic alliances thriving, corporations have begun
to develop organizational structures to support them, and many have come to view the ability to
form and manage partnerships as core skills called partner relationship management (PRM).36
Both pharmaceutical and biotech companies are starting to make partnership a core competency.
It’s estimated that nearly 700 such partnerships were formed in 2007 alone.37 After years of growth
through acquisition and buying interests in two dozen companies, the world’s biggest wireless telecom
operator, Vodafone, has looked outside the company for partners to help it leverage its existing assets.38

Vodafone To spur more innovation and growth, Vodafone has embraced open
source software and open platforms that allow it to tap into the creativity and skills of others. With its Web portal called Betavine, amateur or professional software developers can
create and test their latest mobile applications on any network, not just Vodafone’s. While

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

53

these developers retain intellectual property rights, Vodafone gains early
exposure to the latest trends and ensures that innovations are compatible with its network. Some of the new apps include real-time train
arrivals and departures, movie show times, and an Amazon.com widget
with personalized details. With 289 million customers in 27 countries,
the $35 billion company hasn’t had trouble finding help from interested
corporate partners either. Dell has collaborated with Vodafone to design
laptops and low-priced netbooks with built-in wireless broadband
access over Vodafone’s networks.

Program Formulation
and Implementation
Even a great marketing strategy can be sabotaged by poor implementation. If the unit has decided to attain technological leadership, it must strengthen its R&D
department, gather technological intelligence, develop leading-edge products, train its technical
sales force, and communicate its technological leadership.
Once they have formulated marketing programs, marketers must estimate their costs. Is participating in a particular trade show worth it? Will a specific sales contest pay for itself? Will hiring
another salesperson contribute to the bottom line? Activity-based cost accounting (ABC)—described
in greater detail in Chapter 5—can help determine whether each marketing program is likely to produce sufficient results to justify its cost.39
Today’s businesses recognize that unless they nurture other stakeholders—customers, employees, suppliers, distributors—they may never earn sufficient profits for the stockholders. A company
might aim to delight its customers, perform well for its employees, and deliver a threshold level of
satisfaction to its suppliers. In setting these levels, it must not violate any stakeholder group’s sense
of fairness about the treatment it is receiving relative to the others.40
A dynamic relationship connects the stakeholder groups. A smart company creates a high level
of employee satisfaction, which leads to higher effort, which leads to higher-quality products and
services, which creates higher customer satisfaction, which leads to more repeat business, which
leads to higher growth and profits, which leads to high stockholder satisfaction, which leads to
more investment, and so on. This virtuous circle spells profits and growth.
According to McKinsey & Company, strategy is only one of seven elements—all of which start
with the letter s—in successful business practice.41 The first three—strategy, structure, and
systems—are considered the “hardware” of success. The next four—style, skills, staff, and shared
values—are the “software.”
The first “soft” element, style, means company employees share a common way of thinking
and behaving. The second, skills, means employees have the skills needed to carry out the
company’s strategy. Staffing means the company has hired able people, trained them well,
and assigned them to the right jobs. The fourth element, shared values, means employees share the
same guiding values. When these elements are present, companies are usually more successful at
strategy implementation.42

Feedback and Control
A company’s strategic fit with the environment will inevitably erode, because the market environment
changes faster than the company’s seven Ss. Thus, a company might remain efficient yet lose effectiveness. Peter Drucker pointed out that it is more important to “do the right thing”—to be effective—than
“to do things right”—to be efficient. The most successful companies, however, excel at both.
Once an organization fails to respond to a changed environment, it becomes increasingly hard
to recapture its lost position. Consider KB Toys. Founded in 1922 as a candy wholesaler, the company successfully reinvented itself many times, first by shifting its focus to discounted toys and then
by anticipating the growth of shopping malls. The firm became the second-largest toy retailer in
the world but ultimately crumbled due to competition from big-box retailers and its failed acquisition of eToys. The company declared bankruptcy in 1994 but reemerged in the late 1990s—only to
again file bankruptcy and liquidate its assets in late 2008.

Vodafone has actively partnered
with a number of other firms to help
drive its innovation.

54

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Organizations, especially large ones, are subject to inertia. It’s difficult to change one part without adjusting everything else. Yet, organizations can be changed through strong leadership,
preferably in advance of a crisis. The key to organizational health is willingness to examine the
changing environment and adopt new goals and behaviors.

Product Planning: The Nature and
Contents of a Marketing Plan
Working within the plans set by the levels above them, product managers come up with a marketing plan for individual products, lines, brands, channels, or customer groups. Each product level,
whether product line or brand, must develop a marketing plan for achieving its goals. A marketing
plan is a written document that summarizes what the marketer has learned about the marketplace
and indicates how the firm plans to reach its marketing objectives.43 It contains tactical guidelines
for the marketing programs and financial allocations over the planning period. 44
A marketing plan is one of the most important outputs of the marketing process. It provides
direction and focus for a brand, product, or company. Nonprofit organizations use marketing plans
to guide their fund-raising and outreach efforts, and government agencies use them to build public
awareness of nutrition and stimulate tourism.
More limited in scope than a business plan, the marketing plan documents how the organization will achieve its strategic objectives through specific marketing strategies and tactics, with the
customer as the starting point. It is also linked to the plans of other departments. Suppose a marketing plan calls for selling 200,000 units annually. The production department must gear up to
make that many units, finance must arrange funding to cover the expenses, human resources must
be ready to hire and train staff, and so on. Without the appropriate level of organizational support
and resources, no marketing plan can succeed.
Marketing plans are becoming more customer- and competitor-oriented, better reasoned, and
more realistic. They draw more inputs from all the functional areas and are team-developed.
Planning is becoming a continuous process to respond to rapidly changing market conditions. The
most frequently cited shortcomings of current marketing plans, according to marketing executives,
are lack of realism, insufficient competitive analysis, and a short-run focus. (See “Marketing Memo:
Marketing Plan Criteria” for some guideline questions to ask in developing marketing plans.)
Although the exact length and layout varies from company to company, most marketing plans cover
one year in anywhere from 5 to 50 pages. Smaller businesses may create shorter or less formal marketing
plans, whereas corporations generally require highly structured documents. To guide implementation
effectively, every part of the plan must be described in considerable detail. Sometimes a company will
post its marketing plan on an internal Web site so everyone can consult specific sections and collaborate
on changes. A marketing plan usually contains the following sections.
•
•

•

•

Executive summary and table of contents. The marketing plan should open with a table of
contents and brief summary for senior management of the main goals and recommendations.
Situation analysis. This section presents relevant background data on sales, costs, the market,
competitors, and the various forces in the macroenvironment. How do we define the market,
how big is it, and how fast is it growing? What are the relevant trends and critical issues? Firms
will use all this information to carry out a SWOT analysis.
Marketing strategy. Here the marketing manager defines the mission, marketing and financial objectives, and needs the market offering is intended to satisfy as well as its competitive
positioning. All this requires inputs from other areas, such as purchasing, manufacturing,
sales, finance, and human resources.
Financial projections. Financial projections include a sales forecast, an expense forecast, and a
break-even analysis. On the revenue side is forecasted sales volume by month and product
category, and on the expense side the expected costs of marketing, broken down into finer
categories. The break-even analysis estimates how many units the firm must sell monthly (or
how many years it will take) to offset its monthly fixed costs and average per-unit variable costs.
A more complex method of estimating profit is risk analysis. Here we obtain three estimates
(optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely) for each uncertain variable affecting profitability,
under an assumed marketing environment and marketing strategy for the planning period. The

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

marketing

Memo

Marketing Plan Criteria

Here are some questions to ask in evaluating a marketing plan.
1. Is the plan simple? Is it easy to understand and act on? Does it
communicate its content clearly and practically?
2. Is the plan specific? Are its objectives concrete and measurable? Does
it include specific actions and activities, each with specific dates of
completion, specific persons responsible, and specific budgets?

3. Is the plan realistic? Are the sales goals, expense budgets, and
milestone dates realistic? Has a frank and honest self-critique been
conducted to raise possible concerns and objections?
4. Is the plan complete? Does it include all the necessary elements?
Does it have the right breadth and depth?

Source: Adapted from Tim Berry and Doug Wilson, On Target: The Book on Marketing Plans (Eugene, OR: Palo Alto Software, 2000).

•

computer simulates possible outcomes and computes a distribution showing the range of possible rates of returns and their probabilities.45
Implementation controls. The last section outlines the controls for monitoring and adjusting
implementation of the plan. Typically, it spells out the goals and budget for each month or
quarter, so management can review each period’s results and take corrective action as needed.
Some organizations include contingency plans.

The Role of Research
To develop innovative products, successful strategies, and action programs, marketers need up-to-date
information about the environment, the competition, and the selected market segments. Often, analysis of internal data is the starting point for assessing the current marketing situation, supplemented by
marketing intelligence and research investigating the overall market, the competition, key issues,
threats, and opportunities. As the plan is put into effect, marketers use research to measure progress
toward objectives and identify areas for improvement.
Finally, marketing research helps marketers learn more about their customers’ requirements,
expectations, perceptions, satisfaction, and loyalty. Thus, the marketing plan should outline what
marketing research will be conducted and when, as well as how the findings will be applied.

The Role of Relationships
Although the marketing plan shows how the company will establish and maintain profitable customer relationships, it also affects both internal and external relationships. First, it influences how
marketing personnel work with each other and with other departments to deliver value and satisfy
customers. Second, it affects how the company works with suppliers, distributors, and partners to
achieve the plan’s objectives. Third, it influences the company’s dealings with other stakeholders,
including government regulators, the media, and the community at large. Marketers must consider
all these relationships when developing a marketing plan.

From Marketing Plan to Marketing Action
Most companies create yearly marketing plans. Marketers start planning well in advance of the
implementation date to allow time for marketing research, analysis, management review, and coordination between departments. As each action program begins, they monitor ongoing results,
investigate any deviation from plans, and take corrective steps as needed. Some prepare contingency plans; marketers must be ready to update and adapt marketing plans at any time.
The marketing plan should define how progress toward objectives will be measured. Managers
typically use budgets, schedules, and marketing metrics for monitoring and evaluating results.

55

56

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

With budgets, they can compare planned expenditures with actual expenditures for a given period.
Schedules allow management to see when tasks were supposed to be completed and when they
actually were. Marketing metrics track actual outcomes of marketing programs to see whether the
company is moving forward toward its objectives.

Summary
1. The value delivery process includes choosing (or identifying), providing (or delivering), and communicating superior
value. The value chain is a tool for identifying key activities
that create value and costs in a specific business.
2. Strong companies develop superior capabilities in managing core business processes such as new-product
realization, inventory management, and customer acquisition and retention. Managing these core processes
effectively means creating a marketing network in which
the company works closely with all parties in the production and distribution chain, from suppliers of raw
materials to retail distributors. Companies no longer
compete—marketing networks do.
3. According to one view, holistic marketing maximizes
value exploration by understanding the relationships
between the customer’s cognitive space, the company’s
competence space, and the collaborator’s resource
space; maximizes value creation by identifying new customer benefits from the customer’s cognitive space,
utilizing core competencies from its business domain,
and selecting and managing business partners from its
collaborative networks; and maximizes value delivery by
becoming proficient at customer relationship management, internal resource management, and business
partnership management.

4. Market-oriented strategic planning is the managerial
process of developing and maintaining a viable fit
between the organization’s objectives, skills, and
resources and its changing market opportunities. The
aim of strategic planning is to shape the company’s
businesses and products so they yield target profits
and growth. Strategic planning takes place at four levels: corporate, division, business unit, and product.
5. The corporate strategy establishes the framework
within which the divisions and business units prepare
their strategic plans. Setting a corporate strategy
means defining the corporate mission, establishing
strategic business units (SBUs), assigning resources to
each, and assessing growth opportunities.
6. Strategic planning for individual businesses includes
defining the business mission, analyzing external opportunities and threats, analyzing internal strengths and
weaknesses, formulating goals, formulating strategy,
formulating supporting programs, implementing the programs, and gathering feedback and exercising control.
7. Each product level within a business unit must develop
a marketing plan for achieving its goals. The marketing
plan is one of the most important outputs of the
marketing process.

Applications
Marketing Debate
What Good Is a Mission Statement?

Marketing Discussion
Marketing Planning

Mission statements are often the product of much deliberation and discussion. At the same time, critics claim they
sometimes lack “teeth” and specificity, or do not vary much
from firm to firm and make the same empty promises.
Take a position: Mission statements are critical to a
successful marketing organization versus Mission statements rarely provide useful marketing value.

Consider Porter’s value chain and the holistic marketing
orientation model. What implications do they have for marketing planning? How would you structure a marketing plan
to incorporate some of their concepts?

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

Marketing Excellence

>>Cisco

Cisco Systems is the
worldwide leading supplier of networking equipment
for the Internet. The company sells hardware (routers and
switches), software, and services that make most of the
Internet work. Cisco was founded in 1984 by a husband
and wife team who worked in the computer operations
department at Stanford University. They named the company cisco—with a lowercase c, short for San Francisco,
and developed a logo that resembled the Golden Gate
Bridge, which they frequently traveled.
Cisco went public in 1990 and the two founders left
the company shortly thereafter, due to conflicting interests with the new president and CEO. Over the next
decade, the company grew exponentially, led by newproduct launches such as patented routers, switches,
platforms, and modems—which significantly contributed
to the backbone of the Internet. Cisco opened its first
international offices in London and France in 1991 and
has opened a number of new international offices since
then. During the 1990s, Cisco acquired and successfully integrated 49 companies into its core business. As
a result, the company’s market capitalization grew
faster than for any company in history—from $1 billion
to $300 billion between 1991 and 1999. In March 2000,
Cisco became the most valuable company in the world,
with market capitalization peaking at $582 billion or $82
per share.
By the end of the 20th century, although the company
was extremely successful, brand awareness was low—
Cisco was known to many for its stock price rather than
for what it actually did. Cisco developed partnerships with
Sony, Matsushita, and US West to co-brand its modems
with the Cisco logo in hopes of building its name recognition and brand value. In addition, the company launched
its first television spots as part of a campaign entitled “Are

| CHAPTER 2

57

You Ready?” In the ads, children and adults from around
the world delivered facts about the power of the Internet
and challenged viewers to ponder, “Are You Ready?”
Surviving the Internet bust, the company reorganized
in 2001 into 11 new technology groups and a marketing
organization, which planned to communicate the company’s product line and competitive advantages better than
it had in the past. In 2003, Cisco introduced a new marketing message, “This Is the Power of the Network. Now.” The
international campaign targeted corporate executives and
highlighted Cisco’s critical role in a complicated, technological system by using a soft-sell approach. Television
commercials explained how Cisco’s systems change
people’s lives around the world and an eight-page print ad
spread didn’t mention Cisco’s name until the third page.
Marilyn Mersereau, Cisco’s vice president of corporate
marketing, explained, “Clever advertising involves the
reader in something that’s thought-provoking and provocative and doesn’t slam the brand name into you from the
first page.”
The year 2003 brought new opportunities as Cisco
entered the consumer segment with the acquisition of
Linksys, a home and small-office network gear maker. By
2004, Cisco offered several home entertainment solutions, including wireless capabilities for music, printing,
video, and more. Since previous marketing strategies had
targeted corporate and IT decision makers, the company
launched a rebranding campaign in 2006, to increase
awareness among consumers and help increase the
overall value of Cisco’s brand. “The Human Network”
campaign tried to “humanize” the technology giant by
repositioning it as more than just a supplier of switches
and routers and communicating its critical role in connecting people through technology. The initial results were
positive. Cisco’s revenues increased 41 percent from
2006 to 2008, led by sales increases in both home and
business use. By the end of 2008, Cisco’s revenue
topped $39.5 billion and BusinessWeek ranked it the 18th
biggest global brand.
With its entrance into the consumer market, Cisco
has had to develop unique ways to connect with consumers. One recent development is Cisco Connected
Sports, a platform that turns sports stadiums into digitally
connected interactive venues. The company already has
transformed the Dallas Cowboys, New York Yankees,
Kansas City Royals, Toronto Blue Jays, and Miami
Dolphins stadiums into “the ultimate fan experience” and
plans to add more teams to its portfolio. Fans can virtually
meet the players through Telepresence, a videoconferencing system. Digital displays throughout the stadium
allow fans to pull up scores from other games, order food,
and view local traffic. In addition, HD flat-screen televisions
throughout the stadium ensure that fans never miss a
play—even in the restroom.

58

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Today, Cisco continues to acquire companies—
including 40 between 2004 and 2009—that help it
expand into newer markets such as consumer electronics, business collaboration software, and computer
servers. These acquisitions align with Cisco’s goal of
increasing overall Internet traffic, which ultimately drives
demand for its networking hardware products. However,
by entering into these new markets, Cisco has gained
new competitors such as Microsoft, IBM, and HewlettPackard. To compete against them, it reaches out to both
consumers and businesses in its advertising efforts,
including tapping into social media such as Facebook,
Twitter, and blogs.

Marketing Excellence

>>Intel

Intel makes the microprocessors found in 80 percent of the world’s personal
computers. Today, it is one of the most valuable brands
in the world, with revenues exceeding $37 billion. In the
early days, however, Intel microprocessors were known
simply by their engineering numbers, such as “80386” or
“80486.” Since numbers can’t be trademarked, competitors came out with their own “486” chips and Intel had no
way to distinguish itself. Nor could consumers see Intel’s
products, buried deep inside their PCs. Thus, Intel had a
hard time convincing consumers to pay more for its highperformance products.
As a result, Intel created the quintessential ingredientbranding marketing campaign and made history. It
chose a name for its latest microprocessor introduction
that could be trademarked, Pentium, and launched the
“Intel Inside” campaign to build brand awareness of its
whole family of microprocessors. This campaign helped

Questions
1. How is building a brand in a business-to-business context different from doing so in the consumer market?
2. Is Cisco’s plan to reach out to consumers a viable
one? Why or why not?
Sources: Marguerite Reardon, “Cisco Spends Millions on Becoming Household Name.” CNET,
October 5, 2006; Michelle Kessler, “Tech Giants Build Bridge to Consumers.” USA Today, March 13,
2006; Marla Matzer, “Cisco Faces the Masses.” Los Angeles Times, August 20, 1998; David R. Baker,
“New Ad Campaign for Cisco.” San Francisco Chronicle, February 18, 2003; Bobby White, “Expanding
into Consumer Electronics, Cisco Aims to Jazz Up Its Stodgy Image,” Wall Street Journal, September 6,
2006, p. B1; Burt Helm, “Best Global Brands” BusinessWeek, September 18, 2008; Ashlee Vance,
“Cisco Buys Norwegian Firm for $3 Billion.” New York Times, October 1, 2009; Jennifer Leggio,
“10 Fortune 500 Companies Doing Social Media Right.” ZDNet, September 28, 2009.

move the Intel brand name outside the PC and into the
minds of consumers. In order to execute the new brand
strategy, it was essential that the computer manufacturers who used Intel processors support the program.
Intel gave them significant rebates when they included
the Intel logo in their PC ads or when they placed
the “Intel Inside” sticker on the outside of their PCs
and laptops.
The company created several effective and identifiable marketing campaigns in the late 1990s to become a
recognizable and well-liked ingredient brand name. The
“Bunny People” series featured Intel technicians dressed
in brightly colored contamination suits as they danced to
disco music inside a processor facility. Intel also used the
famous Blue Man Group in its commercials for Pentium III
and Pentium IV.
In 2003, Intel launched Centrino, a platform that
included a new microprocessor, an extended battery, and
wireless capabilities. The company launched a multimilliondollar media effort around the new platform called
“Unwired,” which urged the wired world to “Unwire.
Untangle. Unburden. Uncompromise. Unstress.” “Unwired”
helped the company generate $2 billion in revenue during
the first nine months of the campaign.
As the PC industry slowed in the mid-2000s, Intel
sought opportunities in new growth areas such as home
entertainment and mobile devices. It launched two new
platforms: Viiv (rhymes with “five”) aimed at home entertainment enthusiasts, and Centrino Duo mobile. In
addition, the company created a $2 billion global marketing campaign to help reposition Intel from a brainy
microprocessor company to a “warm and fuzzy company” that offered solutions for consumers as well. As
part of the campaign, Intel’s new slogan “Leap Ahead”
replaced the familiar “Intel Inside” campaign that had
become synonymous with the Intel brand, and a new logo
was created.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

In 2007, Intel created the Classmate PC—a small, kidfriendly, durable, and affordable Intel processor–based
computer intended for children in remote regions of the
world. It was part of an initiative called Intel Learning
Series, intended to help expand education in technology
throughout the world.
The following year, Intel launched the Atom processor, the company’s smallest processor to date, designed
for mobile Internet devices, netbooks, and nettops such
as the Classmate PC. Also that year, Intel introduced
its most advanced microprocessor, the Intel Core i7,
which focused on the needs for video, 3-D gaming, and
advanced computer activities. Both processors became
an instant hit. The Atom, smaller than a grain of rice, ideally powered the growing market of netbooks—mobile,
light computers that weighed as little as 13 ounces. Intel
sold more than 20 million Atom processors for netbooks
in its first year alone and 28 million in its second year.
Some analysts predict that when the Atom processor
taps into the smart phone and cell phone markets, Intel
could sell hundreds of millions of units in a very short
amount of time.
Intel’s most recent ad campaign aimed to improve
the company’s brand awareness was entitled “Sponsors
of Tomorrow.” The commercials highlighted Intel’s role in
changing the future of technology and took a humorous
tone. In one, a middle-aged man wearing his company
ID tag struts through the cafeteria as fellow employees

| CHAPTER 2

59

scream, grope, and beg for his autograph. The screen
reads, “Ajay Bhatt, co-inventor of the U.S.B.” as the
employee (played by an actor) winks at a fan. The ad
ends with the line, “Our superheroes aren’t like your
superheroes.”
As Intel’s superheroes continue to create powerful
microprocessors for smaller and more mobile devices, the
company’s brand value continues to grow, as does its
influence on the future of technology.
Questions
1. Discuss how Intel changed ingredient-marketing history. What did it do so well in those initial marketing
campaigns?
2. Evaluate Intel’s more recent marketing efforts. Did
they lose something by dropping the “Intel Inside”
tagline or not?
Sources: Cliff Edwards, “Intel Everywhere?” BusinessWeek, March 8, 2004, pp. 56–62; Scott Van
Camp, “ReadMe.1st,” Brandweek, February 23, 2004, p. 17; “How to Become a Superbrand,”
Marketing, January 8, 2004, p. 15; Roger Slavens, “Pam Pollace, VP-Director, Corporate Marketing
Group, Intel Corp,” BtoB, December 8, 2003, p. 19; Kenneth Hein, “Study: New Brand Names Not
Making Their Mark,” Brandweek, December 8, 2003, p. 12; Heather Clancy, “Intel Thinking Outside
the Box,” Computer Reseller News, November 24, 2003, p. 14; Cynthia L. Webb, “A Chip Off the
Old Recovery?” Washingtonpost.com, October 15, 2003; “Intel Launches Second Phase of Centrino
Ads,” Technology Advertising & Branding Report, October 6, 2003; David Kirkpatrick, “At Intel,
Speed Isn’t Everything,” Fortune, February 9, 2004, p. 34; Don Clark. “Intel to Overhaul Marketing
in Bid to Go Beyond PCs,” Wall Street Journal, December 30, 2005; Stephanie Clifford, “Tech
Company’s Campaign to Burnish Its Brand,” New York Times, May 6, 2009, p. B7; Tim Bajarin,
“Intel Makes Moves in Mobility,” PC Magazine, October 5, 2009.

60

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Sample Marketing Plan Pegasus Sports International*
1.0 Executive Summary

2.0 Situation Analysis

Pegasus Sports International is a start-up aftermarket inline skating accessory manufacturer. In addition to the aftermarket
products, Pegasus is developing SkateTours, a service that takes
clients out, in conjunction with a local skate shop, and provides
them with an afternoon of skating using inline skates and some of
Pegasus’ other accessories such as SkateSails. The aftermarket
skate accessory market has been largely ignored. Although there
are several major manufacturers of the skates themselves, the
accessory market has not been addressed. This provides
Pegasus with an extraordinary opportunity for market growth.
Skating is a booming sport. Currently, most of the skating is recreational. There are, however, a growing number of skating
competitions, including team-oriented competitions such as
skate hockey as well as individual competitions such as speed
skate racing. Pegasus will work to grow these markets and
develop the skate transportation market, a more utilitarian use of
skating. Several of Pegasus’ currently developed products have
patents pending, and local market research indicates that there is
great demand for these products. Pegasus will achieve fast, significant market penetration through a solid business model,
long-range planning, and a strong management team that is able
to execute this exciting opportunity. The three principals on the
management team have over 30 years of combined personal and
industry experience. This extensive experience provides Pegasus
with the empirical information as well as the passion to provide
the skating market with much-needed aftermarket products.
Pegasus will sell its products initially through its Web site. This
“Dell” direct-to-the-consumer approach will allow Pegasus to
achieve higher margins and maintain a close relationship with the
customers, which is essential for producing products that have a
true market demand. By the end of the year, Pegasus will have
also developed relationships with different skate shops and will
begin to sell some of its products through retailers.

Pegasus is entering its first year of operation. Its products have been
well received, and marketing will be key to the development of brand
and product awareness as well as the growth of the customer base.
Pegasus International offers several different aftermarket skating
accessories, serving the growing inline skating industry.

TABLE 2.1

2.1 Market Summary
Pegasus possesses good information about the market and
knows a great deal about the common attributes of the most
prized customer. This information will be leveraged to better
understand who is served, what their specific needs are, and how
Pegasus can better communicate with them.
Target Markets
■

Recreational

■

Fitness

■

Speed

■

Hockey

■

Extreme

2.1.1 Market Demographics
The profile for the typical Pegasus customer consists of the
following geographic, demographic, and behavior factors:
Geographics
■

Pegasus has no set geographic target area. By leveraging the
expansive reach of the Internet and multiple delivery services,
Pegasus can serve both domestic and international customers.

■

The total targeted population is 31 million users.

Target Market Forecast
Target Market Forecast

Potential Customers

Growth

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

CAGR*

Recreational

10%

19,142,500

21,056,750

23,162,425

25,478,668

28,026,535

10.00%

Fitness

15%

6,820,000

7,843,000

9,019,450

10,372,368

11,928,223

15.00%

Speed

10%

387,500

426,250

468,875

515,763

567,339

10.00%

Hockey

6%

2,480,000

2,628,800

2,786,528

2,953,720

3,130,943

6.00%

Extreme

4%

2,170,000

2,256,800

2,347,072

2,440,955

2,538,593

4.00%

10.48%

31,000,000

34,211,600

37,784,350

41,761,474

46,191,633

10.48%

Total
*Compound Annual Growth Rate

Source: Adapted from a sample plan provided by and copyrighted by Palo Alto Software, Inc. Find more complete sample marketing plans at www.mplans.com. Reprinted by permission of Palo Alto Software.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

Demographics
■

There is an almost equal ratio between male and
female users.

■

Ages 13–46, with 48% clustering around ages 23–34. The
recreational users tend to cover the widest age range, including young users through active adults. The fitness users tend
to be ages 20–40. The speed users tend to be in their late
twenties and early thirties. The hockey players are generally in
their teens through their early twenties. The extreme segment
is of similar age to the hockey players.

■

Of the users who are over 20, 65% have an undergraduate
degree or substantial undergraduate coursework.

■

The adult users have a median personal income of $47,000.

Behavior Factors
■

Users enjoy fitness activities not as a means for a healthy life,
but as an intrinsically enjoyable activity in itself.

■

Users spend money on gear, typically sports equipment.

■

Users have active lifestyles that include some sort of recreation at least two to three times a week.

2.1.2 Market Needs
Pegasus is providing the skating community with a wide range of
accessories for all variations of skating. The company seeks to
fulfill the following benefits that are important to its customers:
■

■

■

Quality craftsmanship. The customers work hard for
their money and do not enjoy spending it on disposable products that work for only a year or two.
Well-thought-out designs. The skating market has not
been addressed by well-thought-out products that serve
skaters’ needs. Pegasus’ industry experience and personal
dedication to the sport will provide it with the needed information to produce insightfully designed products.
Customer service. Exemplary service is required to build
a sustainable business that has a loyal customer base.

| CHAPTER 2

61

Another trend is group skating. More and more groups are getting together on skating excursions in cities all over the world. For
example, San Francisco has night group skating that attracts hundreds of people. The market trends are showing continued
growth in all directions of skating.

2.1.4 Market Growth
With the price of skates going down due to competition by so
many skate companies, the market has had steady growth
throughout the world, although sales had slowed down in some
markets. The growth statistics for 2007 were estimated to be
over 35 million units. More and more people are discovering—
and in many cases rediscovering—the health benefits and
fun of skating.

2.2 SWOT Analysis
The following SWOT analysis captures the key strengths and
weaknesses within the company and describes the opportunities
and threats facing Pegasus.

2.2.1 Strengths
■

In-depth industry experience and insight

■

Creative, yet practical product designers

■

The use of a highly efficient, flexible business model utilizing
direct customer sales and distribution

2.2.2 Weaknesses
■

The reliance on outside capital necessary to grow
the business

■

A lack of retailers who can work face-to-face with the
customer to generate brand and product awareness

■

The difficulty of developing brand awareness as a
start-up company

2.2.3 Opportunities
■

Participation within a growing industry

2.1.3 Market Trends

■

Decreased product costs through economy of scale

Pegasus will distinguish itself by marketing products not previously available to skaters. The emphasis in the past has been to
sell skates and very few replacement parts. The number of
skaters is not restricted to any one single country, continent, or
age group, so there is a world market. Pegasus has products
for virtually every group of skaters. The fastest-growing segment of this sport is the fitness skater. Therefore, the marketing
is being directed toward this group. BladeBoots will enable
users to enter establishments without having to remove their
skates. BladeBoots will be aimed at the recreational skater, the
largest segment. SkateAids, on the other hand, are great for
everyone.
The sport of skating will also grow through SkateSailing. This
sport is primarily for the medium-to-advanced skater, and its
growth potential is tremendous. The sails that Pegasus has manufactured have been sold in Europe, following a pattern similar to
windsurfing. Windsailing originated in Santa Monica but did not
take off until it had already grown big in Europe.

■

The ability to leverage other industry participants’ marketing
efforts to help grow the general market

2.2.4 Threats
■

Future/potential competition from an already established
market participant

■

A slump in the economy that could have a negative effect on
people’s spending of discretionary income on fitness/
recreational products

■

The release of a study that calls into question the safety
of skating or the inability to prevent major skatinginduced traumas

2.3 Competition
Pegasus Sports International is forming its own market. Although
there are a few companies that do make sails and foils that a few

62

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

skaters are using, Pegasus is the only brand that is truly designed
for and by skaters. The few competitors’ sails on the market are
not designed for skating, but for windsurfing or for skateboards. In
the case of foils, storage and carrying are not practical. There are
different indirect competitors who are manufacturers of the actual
skates. After many years in the market, these companies have yet
to become direct competitors by manufacturing accessories for
the skates that they make.

2.4 Product Offering
Pegasus Sports International now offers several products:
■

■

■

The first product that has been developed is BladeBoots,
a cover for the wheels and frame of inline skates, which
allows skaters to enter places that normally would not
allow them in with skates on. BladeBoots come with a
small pouch and belt that converts to a well-designed
skate carrier.
The second product is SkateSails. These sails are specifically
designed for use while skating. Feedback that Pegasus
has received from skaters indicates skatesailing could
become a very popular sport. Trademarking this product is
currently in progress.
The third product, SkateAid, will be in production by the end
of the year. Other ideas for products are under development,
but will not be disclosed until Pegasus can protect them
through pending patent applications.

3.1 Mission
Pegasus Sports International’s mission is to provide the customer
with the finest skating accessories available. “We exist to attract
and maintain customers. With a strict adherence to this maxim,
success will be ensured. Our services and products will exceed
the expectations of the customers.”

3.2 Marketing Objectives
■

Maintain positive, strong growth each quarter (notwithstanding seasonal sales patterns).

■

Achieve a steady increase in market penetration.

■

Decrease customer acquisition costs by 1.5%
per quarter.

3.3 Financial Objectives
■

Increase the profit margin by 1% per quarter through efficiency and economy-of-scale gains.

■

Maintain a significant research and development budget
(as a percentage relative to sales) to spur future product
developments.

■

Achieve a double- to triple-digit growth rate for the first
three years.

2.5 Keys to Success

3.4 Target Markets

The keys to success are designing and producing products that
meet market demand. In addition, Pegasus must ensure total
customer satisfaction. If these keys to success are achieved, it will
become a profitable, sustainable company.

With a world skating market of over 31 million that is steadily
growing (statistics released by the Sporting Goods Manufacturers
Association), the niche has been created. Pegasus’ aim is to
expand this market by promoting SkateSailing, a new sport that is
popular in both Santa Monica and Venice Beach in California. The
Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association survey indicates that
skating now has more participation than football, softball, skiing,
and snowboarding combined. The breakdown of participation
in skating is as follows: 1+% speed (growing), 8% hockey (declining), 7% extreme/aggressive (declining), 22% fitness (nearly
7 million—the fastest growing), and 61% recreational (first-timers).
Pegasus’ products are targeting the fitness and recreational
groups, because they are the fastest growing. These groups are
gearing themselves toward health and fitness, and combined,
they can easily grow to 85% (or 26 million) of the market in the
next five years.

2.6 Critical Issues
As a start-up business, Pegasus is still in the early stages. The
critical issues are for Pegasus to:
■

Establish itself as the premier skating accessory company.

■

Pursue controlled growth that dictates that payroll expenses
will never exceed the revenue base. This will help protect
against recessions.

■

Constantly monitor customer satisfaction, ensuring that
the growth strategy will never compromise service and satisfaction levels.

3.0 Marketing Strategy

3.5 Positioning

The key to the marketing strategy is focusing on the speed, health
and fitness, and recreational skaters. Pegasus can cover about
80% of the skating market because it produces products geared
toward each segment. Pegasus is able to address all of the different segments within the market because, although each segment
is distinct in terms of its users and equipment, its products are
useful to all of the different segments.

Pegasus will position itself as the premier aftermarket skating
accessory company. This positioning will be achieved by leveraging Pegasus’ competitive edge: industry experience and passion.
Pegasus is a skating company formed by skaters for skaters. Its
management is able to use its vast experience and personal passion for the sport to develop innovative, useful accessories for a
broad range of skaters.

DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND PLANS

| CHAPTER 2

63

3.6 Strategies

4.1 Break-Even Analysis

The single objective is to position Pegasus as the premier skating
accessory manufacturer, serving the domestic market as well as the
international market. The marketing strategy will seek to first create
customer awareness concerning the offered products and services
and then develop the customer base. The message that Pegasus
will seek to communicate is that it offers the best-designed, most
useful skating accessories. This message will be communicated
through a variety of methods. The first will be the Pegasus Web site,
which will provide a rich source of product information and offer consumers the opportunity to purchase. A lot of time and money will be
invested in the site to provide the customer with the perception of
total professionalism and utility for Pegasus’ products and services.
The second marketing method will be advertisements placed
in numerous industry magazines. The skating industry is supported by several different glossy magazines designed to promote
the industry as a whole. In addition, a number of smaller periodicals serve the smaller market segments within the skating
industry. The last method of communication is the use of printed
sales literature. The two previously mentioned marketing methods
will create demand for the sales literature, which will be sent out to
customers. The cost of the sales literature will be fairly minimal,
because it will use the already-compiled information from the
Web site.

The break-even analysis indicates that $7,760 will be required in
monthly sales revenue to reach the break-even point.

3.7 Marketing Program
Pegasus’ marketing program is comprised of the following
approaches to pricing, distribution, advertising and promotion,
and customer service.

TABLE 4.1

Break-Even Analysis

Break-Even Analysis:
Monthly Units Break-Even

62

Monthly Sales Break-Even

$ 7,760

Assumptions:
Average Per-Unit Revenue

$125.62

Average Per-Unit Variable Cost

$ 22.61

Estimated Monthly Fixed Cost

$ 6,363

4.2 Sales Forecast
Pegasus feels that the sales forecast figures are conservative. It
will steadily increase sales as the advertising budget allows.
Although the target market forecast (Table 2.1) listed all of the
potential customers divided into separate groups, the sales forecast groups customers into two categories: recreational and
competitive. Reducing the number of categories allows the reader
to quickly discern information, making the chart more functional.

Monthly Sales Forecast

• Pricing. This will be based on a per-product retail price.
• Distribution. Initially, Pegasus will use a direct-to-consumer
distribution model. Over time, it will use retailers as well.

TABLE 4.2

Sales Forecast

• Advertising and promotion. Several different methods
will be used for the advertising effort.

Sales Forecast

• Customer service. Pegasus will strive to achieve benchmarked levels of customer care.

Sales

2011

2012

2013

3.8 Marketing Research

Recreational

$455,740

$598,877

$687,765

Pegasus is blessed with the good fortune of being located in the
center of the skating world: Venice, California. It will be able to
leverage this opportune location by working with many of the different skaters that live in the area. Pegasus was able to test all of
its products not only with its principals, who are accomplished
skaters, but also with the many other dedicated and “newbie”
users located in Venice. The extensive product testing by a wide
variety of users provided Pegasus with valuable product feedback
and has led to several design improvements.

Competitive

$ 72,918

$ 95,820

$110,042

Total Sales

$528,658

$694,697

$797,807

4.0 Financials
This section will offer the financial overview of Pegasus related to
marketing activities. Pegasus will address break-even analysis,
sales forecasts, expense forecast, and indicate how these activities link to the marketing strategy.

Direct Cost of Sales

2011

2012

2013

Recreational

$ 82,033

$107,798

$123,798

Competitive

$ 13,125

$ 17,248

$ 19,808

Subtotal Cost of Sales

$ 95,158

$125,046

$143,606

4.3 Expense Forecast
The expense forecast will be used as a tool to keep the department
on target and provide indicators when corrections/modifications
are needed for the proper implementation of the marketing plan.

64

PART 1

UNDERSTANDING MARKETING MANAGEMENT

Milestones
TABLE 4.3

Milestones
Plan

Milestones
Marketing plan completion
Web site completion
Advertising campaign #1
Advertising campaign #2
Development of the retail channel
Totals

Start Date

End Date

Budget

Manager

Department

1/1/11
1/1/11
1/1/11
3/1/11
1/1/11

2/1/11
3/15/11
6/30/11
12/30/11
11/30/11

$
0
$20,400
$ 3,500
$ 4,550
$
0
$28,450

Stan
outside firm
Stan
Stan
Stan

Marketing
Marketing
Marketing
Marketing
Marketing

Monthly Expense Budget
TABLE 4.4

Marketing Expense Budget

Marketing Expense
Budget

Customer satisfaction

■

New-product development

5.1 Implementation

2011

2012

2013

Web Site

$ 25,000

$ 8,000

$ 10,000

Advertisements

$ 8,050

$ 15,000

$ 20,000

Printed Material

$ 1,725

$ 2,000

$ 3,000

Total Sales and Marketing
Expenses

$ 34,775

$ 25,000

$ 33,000

Percent of Sales

6.58%

3.60%

4.14%

Contribution Margin

$398,725

$544,652

$621,202

75.42%

78.40%

77.86%

Contribution Margin/Sales

■

The following milestones identify the key marketing programs. It is
important to accomplish each one on time and on budget.

5.2 Marketing Organization
Stan Blade will be responsible for the marketing activities.

5.3 Contingency Planning
Difficulties and Risks
■

Problems generating visibility, a function of being an Internetbased start-up organization

■

An entry into the market by an already-established market
competitor

5.0 Controls
The purpose of Pegasus’ marketing plan is to serve as a guide for
the organization. The following areas will be monitored to gauge
performance:
■ Revenue: monthly and annual
■

Expenses: monthly and annual

Worst-Case Risks
■

Determining that the business cannot support itself on an
ongoing basis

■

Having to liquidate equipment or intellectual capital to cover
liabilities

This page intentionally left blank

PART 2 Capturing Marketing Insights
Chapter 3 | Collecting Information and Forecasting Demand
Chapter 4 | Conducting Marketing Research

r
e
t
ap
h
C

3

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What are the components of a modern marketing information
system?
2. What are useful internal records for such a system?
3. What makes up a marketing intelligence system?
4. What are some influential macroenvironment developments?
5. How can companies accurately measure and forecast demand?

The severe economic recession that began
in 2008 led many firms to cut their prices
and use sales to try to retain customers.

Collecting Information
and Forecasting Demand
Making marketing decisions in a fast-changing world is both an art and a
science. To provide context, insight, and inspiration for marketing decision making,
companies must possess comprehensive, up-to-date information about macro trends, as
well as about micro effects particular to their business. Holistic marketers recognize that the
marketing environment is constantly presenting new opportunities and threats, and they
understand the importance of continuously monitoring, forecasting, and adapting to that
environment.

The severe credit crunch and economic slowdown of 2008–2009 brought profound
changes in consumer behavior as shoppers cut and reallocated spending. Sales of
discretionary purchases like toys, apparel, jewelry, and home furnishings dropped.
Sales of luxury brands like Mercedes—driven for years by free-spending
baby boomers—declined by a staggering one-third.
Firms are adjusting the way they do business for more
Meanwhile, brands that offered simple, affordable
reasons than just the economy. Virtually every industry has been
solutions prospered. General Mills’s revenues from such favorites
touched by dramatic shifts in the technological, demographic,
as Cheerios, Wheaties, Progresso soup, and Hamburger Helper social-cultural, natural, and political-legal environments. In this
rose. Consumers also changed how and where they shopped, and chapter, we consider how firms can develop processes to identify
sales of low-priced private label brands soared. Virtually all and track important macroenvironment trends. We also outline
marketers were asking themselves whether a new age of prudence how marketers can develop good sales forecasts. Chapter 4 will
and frugality had emerged and, if so, what would be the appropriate review how they conduct more customized research on specific
marketing problems.
response.

Components of a Modern
Marketing Information System
The major responsibility for identifying significant marketplace changes falls to the company’s
marketers. Marketers have two advantages for the task: disciplined methods for collecting information, and time spent interacting with customers and observing competitors and other outside
groups. Some firms have marketing information systems that provide rich detail about buyer
wants, preferences, and behavior.

67

68

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

DuPont

DuPont

DuPont commissioned marketing studies to uncover personal pillow
behavior for its Dacron Polyester unit, which supplies filling to pillow makers and
sells its own Comforel brand. One challenge is that people don’t give up their old pillows:
37 percent of one sample described their relationship with their pillow as being like that of
“an old married couple,” and an additional 13 percent said their pillow was like a “childhood
friend.” Respondents fell into distinct groups in terms of pillow behavior: stackers (23 percent),
plumpers (20 percent), rollers or folders (16 percent), cuddlers (16 percent), and smashers, who pound
their pillows into a more comfy shape (10 percent). Women were more likely to plump, men to fold. The
prevalence of stackers led the company to sell more pillows packaged as pairs, as well as to market
different levels of softness or firmness.1
Marketers also have extensive information about how consumption patterns vary across and
within countries. On a per capita basis, for example, the Swiss consume the most chocolate, the
Czechs the most beer, the Portuguese the most wine, and the Greeks the most cigarettes.
Table 3.1
summarizes these and other comparisons across countries. Consider regional differences within the
United States: Seattle’s residents buy more toothbrushes per person than in any other U.S. city, people
in Salt Lake City eat more candy bars, New Orleans residents use more ketchup, and people in Miami
drink more prune juice.2

TABLE 3.1

A Global Profile of Extremes

Highest fertility rate

Niger

6.88 children per woman

Highest education expenditure as percent of GDP
Highest number of mobile phone subscribers
Largest number of airports
Highest military expenditure as percent of GDP
Largest refugee population
Highest divorce rate
Highest color TV ownership per 100 households
Mobile telephone subscribers per capita
Highest cinema attendance
Biggest beer drinkers per capita
Biggest wine drinkers per capita
Highest number of smokers per capita
Highest GDP per person
Largest aid donors as % of GDP
Most economically dependent on agriculture
Highest population in workforce
Highest percent of women in workforce
Most crowded road networks
Most deaths in road accidents
Most tourist arrivals
Highest life expectancy
Highest diabetes rate

Kiribati
China
United States
Oman
Pakistan
Aruba
United Arab Emirates
Lithuania
India
Czech Republic
Portugal
Greece
Luxembourg
Sweden
Liberia
Cayman Islands
Belarus
Qatar
South Africa
France
Andorra
United Arab Emirates

17.8% of GDP
547,286,000
14,951 airports
11.40% of GDP
21,075,000 people
4.4 divorces per 1,000 population
99.7 TVs
138.1 subscribers per 100 people
1,473,400,000 cinema visits
81.9 litres per capita
33.1 litres per capita
8.2 cigarettes per person per day
$87,490
1.03% of GDP
66% of GDP
69.20%
53.30%
283.6 vehicle per km of road
31 killed per 100,000 population
79,083,000
83.5 years
19.5% of population aged 20–79

Source: CIA World Fact Book, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/xx.html, accessed July 24, 2009; The Economist’s Pocket World in Figures, 2009 edition, www.economist.com.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

69

A well-researched and well-executed
marketing campaign for the state of
Michigan increased tourism and
state tax revenue.

Companies with superior information can choose their markets better, develop better offerings,
and execute better marketing planning. The Michigan Economic Development Corporation
(MEDC) studied the demographic information of its visitors and those of competing Midwestern
cities to create a new marketing message and tourism campaign. The information helped MEDC
attract 3.8 million new trips to Michigan, $805 million in new visitor spending, and $56 million in
incremental state tax revenue over the period 2004–2008.3
Every firm must organize and distribute a continuous flow of information to its marketing managers. A marketing information system (MIS) consists of people, equipment, and procedures to
gather, sort, analyze, evaluate, and distribute needed, timely, and accurate information to marketing
decision makers. It relies on internal company records, marketing intelligence activities, and marketing research. We’ll discuss the first two components here, and the third one in the next chapter.
The company’s marketing information system should be a mixture of what managers think they
need, what they really need, and what is economically feasible. An internal MIS committee can interview a cross-section of marketing managers to discover their information needs.
Table 3.2
displays some useful questions to ask them.

TABLE 3.2

Information Needs Probes

1. What decisions do you regularly make?
2. What information do you need to make these decisions?
3. What information do you regularly get?
4. What special studies do you periodically request?
5. What information would you want that you are not getting now?
6. What information would you want daily? Weekly? Monthly? Yearly?
7. What online or offline newsletters, briefings, blogs, reports, or magazines would you like to see

on a regular basis?
8. What topics would you like to be kept informed of?
9. What data analysis and reporting programs would you want?
10. What are the four most helpful improvements that could be made in the present marketing
information system?

70

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Internal Records
To spot important opportunities and potential problems, marketing managers rely on internal
reports of orders, sales, prices, costs, inventory levels, receivables, and payables.

The Order-to-Payment Cycle

Fossil Group

The heart of the internal records system is the order-to-payment cycle. Sales representatives, dealers,
and customers send orders to the firm. The sales department prepares invoices, transmits copies to
various departments, and back-orders out-of-stock items. Shipped items generate shipping and
billing documents that go to various departments. Because customers favor firms that can promise
timely delivery, companies need to perform these steps quickly and accurately. Many use the Internet
and extranets to improve the speed, accuracy, and efficiency of the order-to-payment cycle.

Fossil Group Fossil Group Australia designs and distributes accessories

and apparel globally. Its account executives lacked the latest information about pricing and
inventory while taking wholesale orders. High demand items were often out of stock, creating problem for retailers. After the firm deployed a mobile sales solution that connected
account executives with current inventory data, the number of sales tied up in back orders
fell 80 percent. The company can now provide retailers with actual inventory levels and ship orders in
hours instead of days.4

Sales Information Systems
Marketing managers need timely and accurate reports on current sales. Walmart operates a sales
and inventory data warehouse that captures data on every item for every customer, every store,
every day and refreshes it every hour. Consider the experience of Panasonic.

Panasonic Panasonic makes digital cameras, plasma televisions, and other
consumer electronics. After missing revenue goals, the company decided to adopt a
vendor-managed inventory solution. Inventory distribution then came in line with consumption, and availability of products to customers jumped from 70 percent to 95 percent. The
average weeks that product supply sat in Panasonic’s channels went from 25 weeks to just
5 weeks within a year, and unit sales of the targeted plasma television
rose from 20,000 to approximately 100,000. Best Buy, the initial
retailer covered by the vendor-managed inventory model, has since
elevated Panasonic from a Tier 3 Supplier to a Tier 1 “Go-To” Brand for
plasma televisions.5

Panasonic’s new vendor-managed
inventory system met with
marketplace success, including
from retailers.

Companies that make good use of “cookies,” records of Web site
usage stored on personal browsers, are smart users of targeted
marketing. Many consumers are happy to cooperate: A recent survey
showed that 49 percent of individuals agreed cookies are important
to them when using the Internet. Not only do they not delete cookies, but they also expect customized marketing appeals and deals
once they accept them.
Companies must carefully interpret the sales data, however,
so as not to draw the wrong conclusions. Michael Dell gave this
illustration: “If you have three yellow Mustangs sitting on a dealer’s lot and a customer wants
a red one, the salesman may be really good at figuring out how to sell the yellow Mustang. So
the yellow Mustang gets sold, and a signal gets sent back to the factory that, hey, people want
yellow Mustangs.”6

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

71

Databases, Data Warehousing, and Data Mining
Companies organize their information into customer, product, and salesperson databases—and
then combine their data. The customer database will contain every customer’s name, address, past
transactions, and sometimes even demographics and psychographics (activities, interests, and
opinions). Instead of sending a mass “carpet bombing” mailing of a new offer to every customer in
its database, a company will rank its customers according to factors such as purchase recency,
frequency, and monetary value (RFM) and send the offer to only the highest-scoring customers.
Besides saving on mailing expenses, such manipulation of data can often achieve a double-digit
response rate.
Companies make these data easily accessible to their decision makers. Analysts can “mine” the
data and garner fresh insights into neglected customer segments, recent customer trends, and other
useful information. Managers can cross-tabulate customer information with product and salesperson information to yield still-deeper insights. Using in-house technology, Wells Fargo can track
and analyze every bank transaction made by its 10 million retail customers—whether at ATMs, at
bank branches, or online. When it combines transaction data with personal information provided
by customers, Wells Fargo can come up with targeted offerings to coincide with a customer’s lifechanging event. As a result, compared with the industry average of 2.2 products per customer, Wells
Fargo sells 4 products.7 Best Buy is also taking advantage of these new rich databases.

Best Buy Best Buy has assembled a 15-plus
terabyte database with seven years of data on 75 million
households. It captures information about every interaction—
from phone calls and mouse clicks to delivery and rebatecheck addresses—and then deploys sophisticated algorithms
to classify over three-quarters of its customers, or more than 100 million
individuals, into profiled categories such as “Buzz” (the young technology
buff), “Jill” (the suburban soccer mom), “Barry” (the wealthy professional
guy), and “Ray” (the family man). The firm also applies a customer lifetime
value model that measures transaction-level profitability and factors in
customer behaviors that increase or decrease the value of the relationship. Knowing so much about consumers allows Best Buy to employ
precision marketing and customer-triggered incentive programs with
positive response rates.8

Marketing Intelligence
The Marketing Intelligence System
A marketing intelligence system is a set of procedures and sources that managers use to obtain
everyday information about developments in the marketing environment. The internal records
system supplies results data, but the marketing intelligence system supplies happenings data.
Marketing managers collect marketing intelligence in a variety of different ways, such as by reading books, newspapers, and trade publications; talking to customers, suppliers, and distributors;
monitoring social media on the Internet; and meeting with other company managers.
Before the Internet, sometimes you just had to go out in the field, literally, and watch the
competition. This is what oil and gas entrepreneur T. Boone Pickens did. Describing how he
learned about a rival’s drilling activity, Pickens recalls, “We would have someone who would watch
[the rival’s] drilling floor from a half mile away with field glasses. Our competitor didn’t like it but
there wasn’t anything they could do about it. Our spotters would watch the joints and drill pipe.
They would count them; each [drill] joint was 30 feet long. By adding up all the joints, you would
be able to tally the depth of the well.” Pickens knew that the deeper the well, the more costly it
would be for his rival to get the oil or gas up to the surface, and this information provided him with
an immediate competitive advantage.9

Best Buy uses a massive database
to develop profiles with which to
classify its customers.

72

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Marketing intelligence gathering must be legal and ethical. In 2006, the private intelligence firm
Diligence paid auditor KPMG $1.7 million for having illegally infiltrated it to acquire an audit of a
Bermuda-based investment firm for a Russian conglomerate. Diligence’s cofounder posed as a British
intelligence officer and convinced a member of the audit team to share confidential documents.10
A company can take eight possible actions to improve the quantity and quality of its marketing
intelligence. After describing the first seven, we devote special attention to the eighth, collecting
marketing intelligence on the Internet.
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Train and motivate the sales force to spot and report new developments. The company must
“sell” its sales force on their importance as intelligence gatherers. Grace Performance
Chemicals, a division of W. R. Grace, supplies materials and chemicals to the construction and
packaging industries. Its sales reps were instructed to observe the innovative ways customers
used its products in order to suggest possible new products. Some were using Grace waterproofing materials to soundproof their cars and patch boots and tents. Seven new-product
ideas emerged, worth millions in sales.11
Motivate distributors, retailers, and other intermediaries to pass along important intelligence. Marketing intermediaries are often closer to the customer and competition and can offer helpful insights. ConAgra has initiated a study with some of its retailers such as Safeway,
Kroger, and Walmart to study how and why people buy its foods. Finding that shoppers who
bought their Orville Redenbacher and Act II brands of popcorn tended to also buy Coke,
ConAgra worked with the retailers to develop in-store displays for both products. Combining
retailers’ data with its own qualitative insights, ConAgra learned that many mothers switched to
time-saving meals and snacks when school started. It launched its “Seasons of Mom” campaign
to help grocers adjust to seasonal shifts in household needs.12
Hire external experts to collect intelligence. Many companies hire specialists to gather marketing intelligence.13 Service providers and retailers send mystery shoppers to their stores to
assess cleanliness of facilities, product quality, and the way employees treat customers. Health
care facilities’ use of mystery patients has led to improved estimates of wait times, better explanations of medical procedures, and less-stressful programming on the waiting room TV.14
Network internally and externally. The firm can purchase competitors’ products, attend
open houses and trade shows, read competitors’ published reports, attend stockholders’ meetings, talk to employees, collect competitors’ ads, consult with suppliers, and look up news stories about competitors.
Set up a customer advisory panel. Members of advisory panels might include the company’s
largest, most outspoken, most sophisticated, or most representative customers. For example,
GlaxoSmithKline sponsors an online community devoted to weight loss and says it is learning
far more than it could have gleamed from focus groups on topics from packaging its weightloss pill to where to place in-store marketing.15
Take advantage of government-related data resources. The U.S. Census Bureau provides
an in-depth look at the population swings, demographic groups, regional migrations, and
changing family structure of the estimated 304,059,724 people in the United States (as of
July 1, 2008). Census marketer Nielsen Claritas cross-references census figures with consumer surveys and its own grassroots research for clients such as The Weather Channel,
BMW, and Sovereign Bank. Partnering with “list houses” that provide customer phone and
address information, Nielsen Claritas can help firms select and purchase mailing lists with
specific clusters.16
Purchase information from outside research firms and vendors. Well-known data suppliers
include firms such as the A.C. Nielsen Company and Information Resources Inc. They collect
information about product sales in a variety of categories and consumer exposure to various
media. They also gather consumer-panel data much more cheaply than marketers manage on
their own. Biz360 and its online content partners, for example, provide real-time coverage and
analysis of news media and consumer opinion information from over 70,000 traditional and
social media sources (print, broadcast, Web sites, blogs, and message boards).17

Collecting Marketing Intelligence on the Internet
Thanks to the explosion of outlets available on the Internet, online customer review boards, discussion forums, chat rooms, and blogs can distribute one customer’s experiences or evaluation

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

73

to other potential buyers and, of course, to marketers seeking information about the consumers
and the competition. There are five main ways marketers can research competitors’ product
strengths and weaknesses online.18
•

•

•

•

•

Independent customer goods and service review forums. Independent forums include Web
sites such as Epinions.com, RateItAll.com, ConsumerReview.com, and Bizrate.com.
Bizrate.com collects millions of consumer reviews of stores and products each year from two
sources: its 1.3 million volunteer members, and feedback from stores that allow Bizrate.com to
collect it directly from their customers as they make purchases.
Distributor or sales agent feedback sites. Feedback sites offer positive and negative product
or service reviews, but the stores or distributors have built the sites themselves. Amazon.com
offers an interactive feedback opportunity through which buyers, readers, editors, and others
can review all products on the site, especially books. Elance.com is an online professional
services provider that allows contractors to describe their experience and level of satisfaction
with subcontractors.
Combo sites offering customer reviews and expert opinions. Combination sites are concentrated in financial services and high-tech products that require professional knowledge.
ZDNet.com, an online advisor on technology products, offers customer comments and evaluations based on ease of use, features, and stability, along with expert reviews. The advantage is
that a product supplier can compare experts’ opinions with those of consumers.
Customer complaint sites. Customer complaint forums are designed mainly for dissatisfied
customers. PlanetFeedback.com allows customers to voice unfavorable experiences with
specific companies. Another site, Complaints.com, lets customers vent their frustrations with
particular firms or offerings.
Public blogs. Tens of millions of blogs and social networks exist online, offering personal
opinions, reviews, ratings, and recommendations on virtually any topic—and their numbers
continue to grow. Firms such as Nielsen’s BuzzMetrics and Scout Labs analyze blogs and social
networks to provide insights into consumer sentiment.

Communicating and Acting
on Marketing Intelligence
In some companies, the staff scans the Internet and major publications, abstracts relevant news,
and disseminates a news bulletin to marketing managers. The competitive intelligence function
works best when it is closely coordinated with the decision-making process.19
Ticket broker StubHub monitors
online activity so that when
confusion arose over a rainout
at a New York Yankees game, for
instance, it was able to respond
quickly.

74

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Given the speed of the Internet, it is important to act quickly on information gleaned online.
Here are two companies that benefited from a proactive approach to online information:20
•

•

When ticket broker StubHub detected a sudden surge of negative sentiment about its brand
after confusion arose about refunds for a rain-delayed Yankees–Red Sox game, it jumped in to
offer appropriate discounts and credits. The director of customer service observed, “This
[episode] is a canary in a coal mine for us.”
When Coke’s monitoring software spotted a Twitter post that went to 10,000 followers from an
upset consumer who couldn’t redeem a prize from a MyCoke rewards program, Coke quickly
posted an apology on his Twitter profile and offered to help resolve the situation. After the consumer got the prize, he changed his Twitter avatar to a photo of himself holding a Coke bottle.

Analyzing the Macroenvironment
Successful companies recognize and respond profitably to unmet needs and trends.

Needs and Trends
Enterprising individuals and companies manage to create new solutions to unmet needs. Dockers
was created to meet the needs of baby boomers who could no longer fit into their jeans and wanted
a physically and psychologically comfortable pair of pants. Let’s distinguish among fads, trends,
and megatrends.
•

•

•
•

A fad is “unpredictable, short-lived, and without social, economic, and political significance.”
A company can cash in on a fad such as Crocs clogs, Elmo TMX dolls, and Pokémon gifts and
toys, but getting it right requires luck and good timing.21
A direction or sequence of events with momentum and durability, a trend is more predictable
and durable than a fad; trends reveal the shape of the future and can provide strategic direction.
A trend toward health and nutrition awareness has brought increased government regulation
and negative publicity for firms seen as peddling unhealthy food. Macaroni Grill revamped its
menu to include more low-calorie and low-fat offerings after a wave of bad press: The Today
Show called its chicken and artichoke sandwich “the calorie equivalent of 16 Fudgesicles,” and in
its annual list of unhealthy restaurant dishes, Men’s Health declared its 1,630 calorie dessert
ravioli the “worst dessert in America.”22
A megatrend is a “large social, economic, political, and technological change [that] is slow to
form, and once in place, influences us for some time—between seven and ten years, or longer.”23
To help marketers spot cultural shifts that might bring new opportunities or threats, several
firms offer social-cultural forecasts. The Yankelovich Monitor interviews 2,500 people
nationally each year and has tracked 35 social value and lifestyle trends since 1971, such as
“anti-bigness,” “mysticism,” “living for today,” “away from possessions,” and “sensuousness.”
A new market opportunity doesn’t guarantee success, of course, even if the new product is technically feasible. Market research is necessary to determine an opportunity’s profit potential.

Identifying the Major Forces
The end of the first decade of the new century brought a series of new challenges: the steep
decline of the stock market, which affected savings, investment, and retirement funds; increasing
unemployment; corporate scandals; stronger indications of global warming and other signs of
deterioration in the national environment; and of course, the rise of terrorism. These dramatic
events were accompanied by the continuation of many existing trends that have already profoundly influenced the global landscape.24
Firms must monitor six major forces in the broad environment: demographic, economic, socialcultural, natural, technological, and political-legal. We’ll describe them separately, but remember
that their interactions will lead to new opportunities and threats. For example, explosive population
growth (demographic) leads to more resource depletion and pollution (natural), which leads
consumers to call for more laws (political-legal), which stimulate new technological solutions and
products (technological) that, if they are affordable (economic), may actually change attitudes and
behavior (social-cultural).

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

The Demographic Environment
Demographic developments often move at a fairly predictable pace. The main one marketers
monitor is population, including the size and growth rate of population in cities, regions, and
nations; age distribution and ethnic mix; educational levels; household patterns; and regional
characteristics and movements.

WORLDWIDE POPULATION GROWTH World population growth is explosive: Earth’s
population totaled 6.8 billion in 2010 and will exceed 9 billion by 2040.25
Table 3.3 offers an
interesting perspective.26
Population growth is highest in countries and communities that can least afford it. Developing
regions of the world currently account for 84 percent of the world population and are growing at 1 percent to 2 percent per year; the population in developed countries is growing at only 0.3 percent.27 In developing countries, modern medicine is lowering the death rate, but the birthrate remains fairly stable.
A growing population does not mean growing markets unless there is sufficient purchasing power.
Care and education of children can raise the standard of living but are nearly impossible to accomplish in most developing countries. Nonetheless, companies that carefully analyze these markets can
find major opportunities. Sometimes the lessons from developing markets are helping businesses in
developed markets. See “Marketing Insight: Finding Gold at the Bottom of the Pyramid.”
POPULATION AGE MIX Mexico has a very young population and rapid population growth.
At the other extreme is Italy, with one of the world’s oldest populations. Milk, diapers, school
supplies, and toys will be more important products in Mexico than in Italy.
There is a global trend toward an aging population. In 1950, there were only 131 million people 65
and older; in 1995, their number had almost tripled to 371 million. By 2050, one of ten people worldwide will be 65 or older. In the United States, boomers—those born between 1946 and 1964—represent
a market of some 36 million, about 12 percent of the population. By 2011, the 65-and-over population
will be growing faster than the population as a whole in each of the 50 states.28
Marketers generally divide the population into six age groups: preschool children, school-age
children, teens, young adults age 20 to 40, middle-aged adults 40 to 65, and older adults 65 and

TABLE 3.3

The World as a Village

If the world were a village of 100 people:
• 61 villagers would be Asian (of that, 20 would be Chinese and 17 would be Indian), 14 would be
African, 11 would be European, 8 would be Latin or South American, 5 would be North American,
and only one of the villagers would be from Australia, Oceania, or Antarctica.
• At least 18 villagers would be unable to read or write but 33 would have cellular phones and
16 would be online on the Internet.
• 18 villagers would be under 10 years of age and 11 would be over 60 years old. There would be
an equal number of males and females.
• There would be 18 cars in the village.
• 63 villagers would have inadequate sanitation.
• 32 villagers would be Christians, 20 would be Muslims, 14 would be Hindus, 6 would be Buddhists,
16 would be non-religious, and the remaining 12 would be members of other religions.
• 30 villagers would be unemployed or underemployed, while of those 70 who would work, 28 would
work in agriculture (primary sector), 14 would work in industry (secondary sector), and the remaining 28 would work in the service sector (tertiary sector).
• 53 villagers would live on less than two U.S. dollars a day. One villager would have AIDS, 26 villagers
would smoke, and 14 villagers would be obese.
• By the end of a year, one villager would die and two new villagers would be born so the population
would climb to 101.
Source: David J. Smith and Shelagh Armstrong, If the World Were a Village: A Book About the World’s People, 2nd ed. (Tonawanda, NY: Kids Can
Press, 2002).

| CHAPTER 3

75

76

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Marketing Insight
Finding Gold at the Bottom
of the Pyramid
Business writer C.K. Prahalad believes much innovation can come
from developments in emerging markets such as China and India. He
estimates there are 5 billion unserved and underserved people at the
so-called “bottom of the pyramid.” One study showed that 4 billion
people live on $2 or less a day. Firms operating in those markets have
had to learn how to do more with less.
In Bangalore, India, Narayana Hrudayalaya Hospital charges a flat
fee of $1,500 for heart bypass surgery that costs 50 times as much in
the United States. The hospital has low labor and operating expenses
and an assembly-line view of care that has specialists focus on their
own area. The approach works—the hospital’s mortality rates are half
those of U.S. hospitals. Narayana also operates on hundreds of infants
for free and profitably insures 2.5 million poor Indians against serious
illness for 11 cents a month.
Overseas firms are also finding creative solutions in developing
countries. In Brazil, India, Eastern Europe, and other markets, Microsoft
launched its pay-as-you-go FlexGo program, which allows users to prepay to use a fully loaded PC only for as long as wanted or needed without
having to pay the full price the PC would normally command. When the
payment runs out, the PC stops operating and the user prepays again to
restart it.
Other firms find “reverse innovation” advantages by developing
products in countries like China and India and then distributing them
globally. After GE successfully introduced a $1,000 handheld electrocardiogram device for rural India and a portable, PC-based ultrasound

machine for rural China, it began to sell them in the United States.
Nestlé repositioned its low-fat Maggi brand dried noodles—a popular,
low-priced meal for rural Pakistan and India—as a budget-friendly
health food in Australia and New Zealand.
Sources: C.K. Prahalad, The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2010); Bill Breen, “C.K. Prahalad:
Pyramid Schemer,” Fast Company, March 2007, p. 79; Pete Engardio, “Business
Prophet: How C.K. Prahalad Is Changing the Way CEOs Think,” BusinessWeek,
January 23, 2006, pp. 68–73; Reena Jane, “Inspiration from Emerging
Economies,” BusinessWeek, March 23 and 30, 2009, pp. 38–41; Jeffrey R.
Immelt, Vijay Govindarajan, and Chris Trimble, “How GE Is Disrupting Itself,”
Harvard Business Review, October 2009, pp. 56–65; Peter J. Williamson and
Ming Zeng, “Value-for-Money Strategies for Recessionary Times,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2009, pp. 66–74.

older. Some marketers focus on cohorts, groups of individuals born during the same time period
who travel through life together. The defining moments they experience as they come of age and
become adults (roughly ages 17 through 24) can stay with them for a lifetime and influence their
values, preferences, and buying behaviors.

ETHNIC AND OTHER MARKETS Ethnic and racial diversity varies across countries. At one
extreme is Japan, where almost everyone is Japanese; at the other is the United States, where nearly
25 million people—more than 9 percent of the population—were born in another country. As of the
2000 census, the U.S. population was 72 percent White, 13 percent African American, and 11 percent
Hispanic. The Hispanic population has been growing fast and is expected to make up 18.9 percent of
the population by 2020; its largest subgroups are of Mexican (5.4 percent), Puerto Rican (1.1 percent),
and Cuban (0.4 percent) descent. Asian Americans constituted 3.8 percent of the U.S. population;
Chinese are the largest group, followed by Filipinos, Japanese, Asian Indians, and Koreans, in that order.
The growth of the Hispanic population represents a major shift in the nation’s center of gravity.
Hispanics made up half of all new workers in the past decade and will account for 25 percent of

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

workers in two generations. Despite lagging family incomes, their disposable income has grown
twice as fast as the rest of the population and could reach $1.2 trillion by 2012. From the food U.S.
consumers eat, to the clothing, music, and cars they buy, Hispanics are having a huge impact.
Companies are scrambling to refine their products and marketing to reach this fastest-growing
and most influential consumer group:29 Research by Hispanic media giant Univision suggests
70 percent of Spanish-language viewers are more likely to buy a product when it’s advertised in
Spanish. Fisher-Price, recognizing that many Hispanic mothers did not grow up with its brand,
shifted away from appeals to their heritage. Instead, its ads emphasize the joy of mother and child
playing together with Fisher-Price toys.30
Several food, clothing, and furniture companies have directed products and promotions to one
or more ethnic groups.31 Yet marketers must not overgeneralize. Within each ethnic group are consumers quite different from each other.32 For instance, a 2005 Yankelovich Monitor Multicultural
Marketing study separated the African American market into six sociobehavioral segments:
Emulators, Seekers, Reachers, Attainers, Elites, and Conservers. The largest and perhaps most influential are the Reachers (24 percent) and Attainers (27 percent), with very different needs. Reachers,
around 40, are slowly working toward the American dream. Often single parents caring for elderly
relatives, they have a median income of $28,000 and seek the greatest value for their money.
Attainers have a more defined sense of self and solid plans for the future. Their median income is
$55,000, and they want ideas and information to improve their quality of life.33
Diversity goes beyond ethnic and racial markets. More than 51 million U.S. consumers have
disabilities, and they constitute a market for home delivery companies, such as Peapod, and for
various drugstore chains.

EDUCATIONAL GROUPS The population in any society falls into five educational groups:
illiterates, high school dropouts, high school diplomas, college degrees, and professional degrees.
Over two-thirds of the world’s 785 million illiterate adults are found in only eight countries (India,
China, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Indonesia, and Egypt); of all illiterate adults in the
world, two-thirds are women.34 The United States has one of the world’s highest percentages of
college-educated citizens: 54 percent of those 25 years or older have had “some college or more,”
28 percent have bachelor’s degrees, and 10 percent have advanced degrees. The large number of
educated people in the United States drives strong demand for high-quality books, magazines, and
travel, and creates a high supply of skills.

HOUSEHOLD PATTERNS The traditional household consists of a husband, wife, and
children (and sometimes grandparents). Yet by 2010, only one in five U.S. households will consist
of a married couple with children under 18. Other households are single live-alones (27 percent),
single-parent families (8 percent), childless married couples and empty nesters (32 percent), living
with nonrelatives only (5 percent), and other family structures (8 percent).35
More people are divorcing or separating, choosing not to marry, marrying later, or marrying
without intending to have children. Each group has distinctive needs and buying habits. The
single, separated, widowed, and divorced may need smaller apartments; inexpensive and
smaller appliances, furniture, and furnishings; and smaller-size food packages.36
Nontraditional households are growing more rapidly than traditional households. Academics
and marketing experts estimate that the gay and lesbian population ranges between 4 percent and
8 percent of the total U.S. population, higher in urban areas.37 Even so-called traditional households have experienced change. Boomer dads marry later than their fathers or grandfathers did,
shop more, and are much more active in raising their kids. To appeal to them, the maker of the
high-concept Bugaboo stroller designed a model with a sleek look and dirt bike–style tires. Dyson,
the high-end vacuum company, is appealing to dads’ inner geek by focusing on the machine’s revolutionary technology. Before Dyson entered the U.S. market, men weren’t even on the radar for vacuum cleaner sales. Now they make up 40 percent of Dyson’s customers.38

The Economic Environment
The available purchasing power in an economy depends on current income, prices, savings, debt,
and credit availability. As the recent economic downturn vividly demonstrated, trends affecting
purchasing power can have a strong impact on business, especially for companies whose products
are geared to high-income and price-sensitive consumers.

| CHAPTER 3

77

78

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

CONSUMER PSYCHOLOGY Did new consumer spending

Starwood’s Aloft hotel chain
blends urban chic with affordable
prices.

patterns during the 2008–2009 recession reflect short-term, temporary
adjustments or long-term, permanent changes?39 Some experts
believed the recession had fundamentally shaken consumers’ faith in
the economy and their personal financial situations. “Mindless”
spending would be out; willingness to comparison shop, haggle, and
use discounts would become the norm. Others maintained tighter
spending reflected a mere economic constraint and not a fundamental
behavioral change. Thus, consumers’ aspirations would stay the same,
and spending would resume when the economy improves.
Identifying the more likely long-term scenario—especially with
the coveted 18- to 34-year-old age group—would help to direct how
marketers spend their money. After six months of research and development in the baby boomer market, Starwood launched a “style
at a steal” initiative to offer affordable but stylish hotel alternatives
to its high-end W, Sheraton, and Westin chains. Targeting an audience seeking both thrift and luxury, it introduced two new low-cost chains: Aloft, designed to reflect the urban cool of loft apartments, and Element, suites with every “element” of modern daily
lives, including healthy food choices and spa-like bathrooms.40

INCOME DISTRIBUTION There are four types of industrial structures: subsistence economies
like Papua New Guinea, with few opportunities for marketers; raw-material-exporting economies
like Democratic Republic of Congo (copper) and Saudi Arabia (oil), with good markets for
equipment, tools, supplies, and luxury goods for the rich; industrializing economies like India,
Egypt, and the Philippines, where a new rich class and a growing middle class demand new types of
goods; and industrial economies like Western Europe, with rich markets for all sorts of goods.
Marketers often distinguish countries using five income-distribution patterns: (1) very low
incomes; (2) mostly low incomes; (3) very low, very high incomes; (4) low, medium, high incomes;
and (5) mostly medium incomes. Consider the market for the Lamborghini, an automobile costing
more than $150,000. The market would be very small in countries with type 1 or 2 income patterns.
One of the largest single markets for Lamborghinis is Portugal (income pattern 3)—one of the
poorer countries in Western Europe, but with enough wealthy families to afford expensive cars.
INCOME, SAVINGS, DEBT, AND CREDIT Consumer expenditures are affected by
income levels, savings rates, debt practices, and credit availability. U.S. consumers have a high
debt-to-income ratio, which slows expenditures on housing and large-ticket items. When credit
became scarcer in the recession, especially to lower-income borrowers, consumer borrowing
dropped for the first time in two decades. The financial meltdown that led to this contraction
was due to overly liberal credit policies that allowed consumers to buy homes and other items
they could really not afford. Marketers wanted every possible sale, banks wanted to earn interest
on loans, and near financial ruin resulted.
An economic issue of increasing importance is the migration of manufacturers and service jobs
offshore. From India, Infosys provides outsourcing services for Cisco, Nordstrom, Microsoft, and
others. The 25,000 employees the fast-growing $4 billion company hires every year receive technical, team, and communication training in Infosys’s $120 million facility outside Bangalore.41

The Sociocultural Environment
From our sociocultural environment we absorb, almost unconsciously, a world view that defines
our relationships to ourselves, others, organizations, society, nature, and the universe.
•

•

Views of ourselves. In the United States during the 1960s and 1970s, “pleasure seekers”
sought fun, change, and escape. Others sought “self-realization.” Today, some are adopting
more conservative behaviors and ambitions (see
Table 3.4 for favorite consumer leisuretime activities and how they have changed, or not, in recent years).
Views of others. People are concerned about the homeless, crime and victims, and other
social problems. At the same time, they seek those like themselves for long-lasting relationships, suggesting a growing market for social-support products and services such as health
clubs, cruises, and religious activity as well as “social surrogates” like television, video games,
and social networking sites.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

TABLE 3.4

Favorite Leisure-Time Activities

Reading
TV watching
Spending time with family/kids
Going to movies
Fishing
Computer activities
Gardening
Renting movies
Walking
Exercise (aerobics, weights)

1995

2008

%
28
25
12
8
10
2
9
5
8
2

%
30
24
20
8
7
7
5
5
6
8

Source: Harris Interactive, “Spontaneous, Unaided Responses to: ‘What Are Your Two or Three Most Favorite Leisure-Time Activities?’”
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=980. Base: All Adults.

•

•

•

•

Views of organizations. After a wave of layoffs and corporate scandals, organizational loyalty
has declined.42 Companies need new ways to win back consumer and employee confidence.
They need to ensure they are good corporate citizens and that their consumer messages
are honest.43
Views of society. Some people defend society (preservers), some run it (makers), some take
what they can from it (takers), some want to change it (changers), some are looking for something deeper (seekers), and still others want to leave it (escapers).44 Consumption patterns
often reflect these social attitudes. Makers are high achievers who eat, dress, and live well.
Changers usually live more frugally, drive smaller cars, and wear simpler clothes. Escapers and
seekers are a major market for movies, music, surfing, and camping.
Views of nature. Business has responded to increased awareness of nature’s fragility and
finiteness by producing wider varieties of camping, hiking, boating, and fishing gear such as
boots, tents, backpacks, and accessories.
Views of the universe. Most U.S. citizens are monotheistic, although religious conviction and
practice have waned through the years or been redirected into an interest in evangelical movements or Eastern religions, mysticism, the occult, and the human potential movement.

Other cultural characteristics of interest to marketers are the high persistence of core cultural
values and the existence of subcultures. Let’s look at both.

HIGH PERSISTENCE OF CORE CULTURAL VALUES Most people in the United States
still believe in working, getting married, giving to charity, and being honest. Core beliefs and
values are passed from parents to children and reinforced by social institutions—schools,
churches, businesses, and governments. Secondary beliefs and values are more open to change.
Believing in the institution of marriage is a core belief; believing people should marry early is a
secondary belief.
Marketers have some chance of changing secondary values, but little chance of changing core
values. The nonprofit organization Mothers Against Drunk Drivers (MADD) does not try to stop
the sale of alcohol but promotes lower legal blood-alcohol levels for driving and limited operating
hours for businesses that sell alcohol.
Although core values are fairly persistent, cultural swings do take place. In the 1960s, hippies,
the Beatles, Elvis Presley, and other cultural phenomena had a major impact on hairstyles, clothing,
sexual norms, and life goals. Today’s young people are influenced by new heroes and activities: the
alternative rock band Green Day, the NBA’s LeBron James, and snowboarder and skateboarder
Shaun White.

| CHAPTER 3

79

80

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Young people may be influenced by a diverse range of heroes, from basketball player LeBron
James to punk-rock band Green Day.

EXISTENCE OF SUBCULTURES Each society contains subcultures, groups with shared values,
beliefs, preferences, and behaviors emerging from their special life experiences or circumstances.
Marketers have always loved teenagers because they are trendsetters in fashion, music, entertainment,
ideas, and attitudes. Attract someone as a teen, and you will likely keep the person as a customer later in
life. Frito-Lay, which draws 15 percent of its sales from teens, noted a rise in chip snacking by grownups. “We think it’s because we brought them in as teenagers,” said Frito-Lay’s marketing director.45

The Natural Environment
In Western Europe, “green” parties have pressed for public action to reduce industrial pollution. In
the United States, experts have documented ecological deterioration, and watchdog groups such as
the Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth carry these concerns into political and social action.
Environmental regulations hit certain industries hard. Steel companies and public utilities have
invested billions of dollars in pollution-control equipment and environmentally friendly fuels,
making hybrid cars, low-flow toilets and showers, organic foods, and green office buildings everyday realities. Opportunities await those who can reconcile prosperity with environmental protection. Consider these solutions to concerns about air quality:46
•

•

Nearly a quarter of the carbon dioxide that makes up about 80 percent of all greenhouse gases
comes from electrical power plants. Dublin-based Airtricity operates wind farms in the United
States and the United Kingdom that offer cheaper and greener electricity.
Transportation is second only to electricity generation as a contributor to global warming,
accounting for roughly a fifth of carbon emissions. Vancouver-based Westport Innovations
developed a conversion technology—high-pressure direct injection—that allows diesel engines
to run on cleaner-burning liquid natural gas, reducing greenhouse emissions by a fourth.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

81

Actor and environmental activist
Ed Begley Jr. examines a solar
oven.

•

Due to millions of rural cooking fires, parts of Southern Asia suffer extremely poor
air quality. A person cooking over an open wood or kerosene fire inhales the equivalent
of two packs of cigarettes a day. Illinois-based Sun Ovens International makes family-sized
and institutional solar ovens that use mirrors to redirect the sun’s rays into an
insulated box. Used in 130 countries, the oven both saves money and reduces greenhouse
gas emissions.

Corporate environmentalism recognizes the need to integrate environmental issues into the
firm’s strategic plans. Trends in the natural environment for marketers to be aware of include the
shortage of raw materials, especially water; the increased cost of energy; increased pollution levels;
and the changing role of governments. (See also “Marketing Insight: The Green Marketing
Revolution.”)47
•

•

•

•

The earth’s raw materials consist of the infinite, the finite renewable, and the finite nonrenewable. Firms whose products require finite nonrenewable resources—oil, coal, platinum,
zinc, silver—face substantial cost increases as depletion approaches. Firms that can develop
substitute materials have an excellent opportunity.
One finite nonrenewable resource, oil, has created serious problems for the world economy. As
oil prices soar, companies search for practical means to harness solar, nuclear, wind, and other
alternative energies.
Some industrial activity will inevitably damage the natural environment, creating a large market
for pollution-control solutions such as scrubbers, recycling centers, and landfill systems as well as
for alternative ways to produce and package goods.
Many poor nations are doing little about pollution, lacking the funds or the political will. It is
in the richer nations’ interest to help them control their pollution, but even richer nations
today lack the necessary funds.

The Technological Environment
It is the essence of market capitalism to be dynamic and tolerate the creative destructiveness of
technology as the price of progress. Transistors hurt the vacuum-tube industry, and autos hurt the
railroads. Television hurt the newspapers, and the Internet hurt them both.
When old industries fight or ignore new technologies, their businesses decline. Tower Records
had ample warning that its music retail business would be hurt by Internet downloads of music (as
well as the growing number of discount music retailers). Its failure to respond led to the liquidation
of all its domestic physical stores in 2006.

82

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Marketing Insight
The Green Marketing Revolution
Consumers’ environmental concerns are real. Gallup polls reveal the
percentage of U.S. adults who believe global warming will pose a
serious threat during their lifetime has increased from 25 percent in
1998 to 40 percent in 2008. A Mediamark Research & Intelligence
study in 2008 found that almost two-thirds of U.S. men and women
stated that “preserving the environment as a guiding principle in
your life” was “very important.” A Washington Post /ABC News/
Stanford University poll in 2007 found that 94 percent of respondents were “willing” to “personally change some of the things you do
in order to improve the environment,” with 50 percent saying they
were “very willing.”
Converting this concern into concerted consumer action on the
environment, however, will be a longer-term process. A 2008 TNS
survey found that only 26 percent of Americans said they were
“actively seeking environmentally friendly products.” A 2008 Gallup
poll found that only 28 percent of respondents claimed to have made
“major changes” in their own shopping and living habits over the past
five years to protect the environment. Other research reported that
consumers were more concerned with closer to home environmental
issues such as water pollution in rivers and lakes than broader issues
such as global warming. As is often the case, behavioral change is
following attitudinal change for consumers.

Nevertheless, as research by GfK Roper Consulting shows, consumer
expectations as to corporate behavior with the environment have significantly changed, and in many cases these expectations are higher than the
demands they place on themselves. Consumers vary, however, in their environmental sensitivity and can be categorized into five groups based on
their degree of commitment (see
Figure 3.1). Interestingly, although
some marketers assume that younger people are more concerned about
the environment than older consumers, some research suggests that older
consumers actually take their eco-responsibilities more seriously.
In the past, the “green marketing” programs launched by companies around specific products were not always entirely successful for
several possible reasons. Consumers might have thought that
the product was inferior because it was green, or that it was not
even really green to begin with. Those green products that were successful, however, persuaded consumers that they were acting in their
own and society’s long-run interest at the same time. Some examples
were organic foods that were seen as healthier, tastier, and safer, and
energy-efficient appliances that were seen as costing less to run.
There are some expert recommendations as to how to avoid “green
marketing myopia” by focusing on consumer value positioning, calibration of consumer knowledge, and the credibility of product claims.
One challenge with green marketing is the difficulty consumers have in
understanding the environmental benefits of products, leading to many
accusations of “greenwashing” where products are not nearly as green
and environmentally beneficial as their marketing might suggest.
Although there have been green products emphasizing their
natural benefits for years—Tom’s of Maine, Burt’s Bees, Stonyfield
Farm, and Seventh Generation to name just a few—products offering
environmental benefits are becoming more mainstream. Part of the success of Clorox Green Works cleaning products and household cleaning
products, launched in January 2008, was that it found the sweet spot of
a target market wanting to take smaller steps toward a greener lifestyle

|Fig. 3.1|

Consumer
Environmental
Segments
®

Source: GfK Roper Green Gauge 2007, GfK Roper
Consulting, New York, NY.

• Genuine Greens (15%): This segment is the most likely to think and act green. Some may be true environmental activists, but most probably fall more under the category of strong advocates. This group sees few
barriers to behaving green and may be open to partnering with marketers on environmental initiatives.

• Not Me Greens (18%): This segment expresses very pro-green attitudes, but its behaviors are only moderate, perhaps because these people perceive lots of barriers to living green. There may be a sense among
this group that the issue is too big for them to handle, and they may need encouragement to take action.

• Go-with-the-Flow Greens (17%): This group engages in some green behaviors—mostly the “easy” ones
such as recycling. But being green is not a priority for them, and they seem to take the path of least resistance. This group may only take action when it’s convenient for them.

• Dream Greens (13%): This segment cares a great deal about the environment, but doesn’t seem to
have the knowledge or resources to take action. This group may offer the greatest opportunity to act
green if given the chance.

• Business First Greens (23%): This segment’s perspective is that the environment is not a huge concern
and that business and industry is doing its part to help. This may explain why they don’t feel the need to
take action themselves—even as they cite lots of barriers to doing so.

• Mean Greens (13%): This group claims to be knowledgeable about environmental issues, but does not
express pro-green attitudes or behaviors. Indeed, it is practically hostile toward pro-environmental ideas.
This segment has chosen to reject prevailing notions about environmental protection and may even be
viewed as a potential threat to green initiatives.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

and matched that with a green product with a very modest price premium and sold through a grassroots marketing program.
Environmental concerns are affecting how virtually every major
company does their business: Walt Disney Corp. has pledged to reduce
its solid waste by 2013, conserve millions of gallons of water, invest in
renewable energy, and become completely carbon neutral (reaching
50 percent of that goal by 2012); Best Buy has expanded its recycling
program for electronics; Caterpillar announced plans to reduce the GHG
emissions of its entire product line by 20 percent by 2020; and Whole
Foods, a leader among national supermarket chains in selling certified
“organic food” already, cofounded a partnership to reduce emissions
from grocery refrigerators and offsets 100 percent of its electricity use
with renewable energy via wind-energy credits.
Toyota, HP, IKEA, Procter & Gamble, and Walmart have all been linked
to high-profile environmental and sustainability programs. Some other
marketers, fearing harsh scrutiny or unrealistic expectations, keep a lower
profile. Even though Nike uses recycled sneakers in its soles of new shoes,
they chose not to publicize that fact so that they can keep their focus on performance and winning.The rules of the game in green marketing are changing rapidly as both consumers and companies respond to problems and
proposed solutions to the significant environmental problems that exist.
Sources: Jerry Adler, “Going Green,” Newsweek, July 17, 2006, pp. 43–52;
Jacquelyn A. Ottman, Edwin R. Stafford, and Cathy L. Hartman, “Avoiding Green
Marketing Myopia,” Environment (June 2006): 22–36; Jill Meredith Ginsberg and
Paul N. Bloom, “Choosing the Right Green Marketing Strategy,” MIT Sloan
Management Review (Fall 2004): 79–84; Jacquelyn Ottman, Green Marketing:
Opportunity for Innovation, 2nd ed. (New York: BookSurge Publishing, 2004); Mark
Dolliver, “Deflating a Myth,”Brandweek, May 12, 2008, pp. 30–31; “Winner:
Corporate Sustainability, Walt Disney Worldwide,” Travel and Leisure, November
2009, p. 106; “The Greenest Big Companies in America, Newsweek, September 28,
2009, pp. 34–53; Sarah Mahoney, “Best Buy Connects Green with Thrift,” Media
Post News: Marketing Daily, January 28, 2009; Reena Jana, “Nike Quietly Goes
Green,” BusinessWeek, June 11, 2009.

Clorox’s Green Works has been a huge market hit by combining
environmental benefits with affordability.

Major new technologies stimulate the economy’s growth rate. Unfortunately, between innovations, an economy can stagnate. Minor innovations fill the gap—new supermarket products such
as frozen waffles, body washes, and energy bars might pop up—but while lower risk, they can also
divert research effort away from major breakthroughs.
Innovation’s long-run consequences are not always foreseeable. The contraceptive pill reduced
family size and thus increased discretionary incomes, also raising spending on vacation travel,
durable goods, and luxury items. Cell phones, video games, and the Internet are reducing attention
to traditional media, as well as face-to-face social interaction as people listen to music or watch a
movie on their cell phones.
Marketers should monitor the following technology trends: the accelerating pace of change,
unlimited opportunities for innovation, varying R&D budgets, and increased regulation of technological change.

ACCELERATING PACE OF CHANGE More ideas than ever are in the works, and the time
between idea and implementation is shrinking. So is the time between introduction and peak
production. Apple ramped up in seven years to sell a staggering 220 million iPods worldwide by
September 2009.

UNLIMITED OPPORTUNITIES FOR INNOVATION Some of the most exciting work today is
taking place in biotechnology, computers, microelectronics, telecommunications, robotics, and designer
materials. Researchers are working on AIDS vaccines, safer contraceptives, and nonfattening foods. They
are developing new classes of antibiotics to fight ultra-resistant infections, superheating furnaces to
reduce trash to raw materials, and building miniature water-treatment plants for remote locations.48

83

84

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

VARYING R&D BUDGETS A growing portion of U.S. R&D expenditures
goes to the development as opposed to the research side, raising concerns about
whether the United States can maintain its lead in basic science. Many
companies put their money into copying competitors’ products and making
minor feature and style improvements. Even basic research companies such as
Dow Chemical, Bell Laboratories, and Pfizer are proceeding cautiously, and
more consortiums than single companies are directing research efforts toward
major breakthroughs.
INCREASED REGULATION OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
Government has expanded its agencies’ powers to investigate and ban potentially
unsafe products. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
must approve all drugs before they can be sold. Safety and health
regulations have increased for food, automobiles, clothing, electrical appliances,
and construction.

The Political-Legal Environment
The political and legal environment consists of laws, government agencies, and pressure groups that influence various organizations and individuals. Sometimes these
laws create new business opportunities. Mandatory recycling laws have boosted the
recycling industry and launched dozens of new companies making new products
from recycled materials. Two major trends are the increase in business legislation
and the growth of special-interest groups.
Text messaging is profoundly
changing how consumers choose
to communicate.

INCREASE IN BUSINESS LEGISLATION Business legislation is intended to
protect companies from unfair competition, protect consumers from unfair business practices,
protect society from unbridled business behavior, and charge businesses with the social costs of
their products or production processes. Each new law may also have the unintended effect of
sapping initiative and slowing growth.
The European Commission has established new laws covering competitive behavior, product
standards, product liability, and commercial transactions for the 27 member nations of the
European Union. The United States has many consumer protection laws covering competition,
product safety and liability, fair trade and credit practices, and packaging and labeling, but many
countries’ laws are stronger.49 Norway bans several forms of sales promotion—trading stamps,
contests, and premiums—as inappropriate or unfair. Thailand requires food processors selling national brands to market low-price brands also, so low-income consumers can find economy
brands. In India, food companies need special approval to launch duplicate brands, such as another
cola drink or brand of rice. As more transactions take place in cyberspace, marketers must establish
new ways to do business ethically.
GROWTH OF SPECIAL-INTEREST GROUPS Political action committees (PACs)
lobby government officials and pressure business executives to respect the rights of consumers,
women, senior citizens, minorities, and gays and lesbians. Insurance companies directly or
indirectly affect the design of smoke detectors; scientific groups affect the design of spray
products. Many companies have established public affairs departments to deal with these
groups and issues. The consumerist movement organized citizens and government to
strengthen the rights and powers of buyers in relationship to sellers. Consumerists have won the
right to know the real cost of a loan, the true cost per standard unit of competing brands (unit
pricing), the basic ingredients and true benefits of a product, and the nutritional quality and
freshness of food.
Privacy issues and identity theft will remain public policy hot buttons as long as consumers are willing to swap personal information for customized products—from marketers
they trust.50 Consumers worry they will be robbed or cheated; that private information will
be used against them; that they will be bombarded by solicitations; and that children will be
targeted.51 Wise companies establish consumer affairs departments to formulate policies and
resolve complaints.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

| CHAPTER 3

85

Forecasting and Demand
Measurement
Understanding the marketing environment and conducting marketing research (described in
Chapter 4) can help to identify marketing opportunities. The company must then measure and
forecast the size, growth, and profit potential of each new opportunity. Sales forecasts prepared
by marketing are used by finance to raise cash for investment and operations; by manufacturing
to establish capacity and output; by purchasing to acquire the right amount of supplies; and by
human resources to hire the needed workers. If the forecast is off the mark, the company will face
excess or inadequate inventory. Since it’s based on estimates of demand, managers need to define
what they mean by market demand. Although DuPont’s Performance Materials group knows
DuPont Tyvek has 70 percent of the $100 million market for air-barrier membranes, they see
greater opportunity with more products and services to tap into the entire $7 billion U.S. home
construction market.52

The Measures of Market Demand
Companies can prepare as many as 90 different types of demand estimates for six different product
levels, five space levels, and three time periods (see
Figure 3.2). Each demand measure serves a
specific purpose. A company might forecast short-run demand to order raw materials, plan
production, and borrow cash. It might forecast regional demand to decide whether to set up
regional distribution.
There are many productive ways to break down the market:
•

•

•

•

The potential market is the set of consumers with a sufficient level of interest in a market
offer. However, their interest is not enough to define a market unless they also have sufficient
income and access to the product.
The available market is the set of consumers who have interest, income, and access to a
particular offer. The company or government may restrict sales to certain groups; a
particular state might ban motorcycle sales to anyone under 21 years of age. Eligible
adults constitute the qualified available market—the set of consumers who have interest,
income, access, and qualifications for the market offer.
The target market is the part of the qualified available market the company decides to
pursue. The company might concentrate its marketing and distribution effort on the
East Coast.
The penetrated market is the set of consumers who are buying the company’s product.

Space
Level

|Fig. 3.2|

World
U.S.A.
Region
Territory
Customer

Ninety Types of
Demand Measurement
(6 × 5 × 3)

All sales
Industry sales
Product
Level

Company sales
Product line sales
Product form sales
Product item sales
Short run

Medium run
Time Level

Long run

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

These definitions are a useful tool for market planning. If the company isn’t satisfied with its
current sales, it can try to attract a larger percentage of buyers from its target market. It can lower
the qualifications for potential buyers. It can expand its available market by opening distribution
elsewhere or lowering its price, or it can reposition itself in the minds of its customers.

A Vocabulary for Demand Measurement
The major concepts in demand measurement are market demand and company demand. Within
each, we distinguish among a demand function, a sales forecast, and a potential.

MARKET DEMAND The marketer’s first step in evaluating marketing opportunities is to
estimate total market demand. Market demand for a product is the total volume that would be
bought by a defined customer group in a defined geographical area in a defined time period in a
defined marketing environment under a defined marketing program.
Market demand is not a fixed number, but rather a function of the stated conditions. For this
reason, we call it the market demand function. Its dependence on underlying conditions is illustrated in
Figure 3.3(a). The horizontal axis shows different possible levels of industry
marketing expenditure in a given time period. The vertical axis shows the resulting demand
level. The curve represents the estimated market demand associated with varying levels of
marketing expenditure.
Some base sales—called the market minimum and labeled Q1 in the figure—would take place
without any demand-stimulating expenditures. Higher marketing expenditures would yield higher
levels of demand, first at an increasing rate, then at a decreasing rate. Take fruit juices. Given the indirect competition they face from other types of beverages, we would expect increased marketing
expenditures to help fruit juice products stand out and increase demand and sales. Marketing
expenditures beyond a certain level would not stimulate much further demand, suggesting an
upper limit called the market potential and labeled Q2 in the figure.
The distance between the market minimum and the market potential shows the overall
marketing sensitivity of demand. We can think of two extreme types of markets, the expansible and
the nonexpansible. An expansible market, such as the market for racquetball playing, is very much
affected in size by the level of industry marketing expenditures. In terms of Figure 3.3(a), the
distance between Q1 and Q2 is relatively large. A nonexpansible market—for example, the market
for weekly trash or garbage removal—is not much affected by the level of marketing expenditures;
the distance between Q1 and Q2 is relatively small. Organizations selling in a nonexpansible market
must accept the market’s size—the level of primary demand for the product class—and direct their
efforts toward winning a larger market share for their product, that is, a higher level of selective
demand for their product.
It pays to compare the current and potential levels of market demand. The result is the marketpenetration index. A low index indicates substantial growth potential for all the firms. A high
index suggests it will be expensive to attract the few remaining prospects. Generally, price competition increases and margins fall when the market-penetration index is already high.

(a) Marketing Demand as a Function of Industry
Marketing Expenditure (assumes a particular
marketing environment)
Market
potential, Q2
Market
forecast, QF

Market
minimum, Q1

|Fig. 3.3|

Planned
expenditure
Industry Marketing Expenditure

Market Demand in the Specific Period

PART 2

Market Demand in the Specific Period

86

Market Demand Functions

(b) Marketing Demand as a Function of Industry
Marketing Expenditure (two different
environments assumed)

Market
potential
(prosperity)

Prosperity

Market
potential
(recession)

Recession

Industry Marketing Expenditure

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

Comparing current and potential market shares yields a firm’s share-penetration index.
If this index is low, the company can greatly expand its share. Holding it back could be low
brand awareness, low availability, benefit deficiencies, or high price. A firm should calculate the
share-penetration increases from removing each factor, to see which investments produce the
greatest improvement.53
Remember the market demand function is not a picture of market demand over time. Rather, it
shows alternative current forecasts of market demand associated with possible levels of industry
marketing effort.

MARKET FORECAST Only one level of industry marketing expenditure will actually occur.
The market demand corresponding to this level is called the market forecast.
MARKET POTENTIAL The market forecast shows expected market demand, not maximum
market demand. For the latter, we need to visualize the level of market demand resulting from a
very high level of industry marketing expenditure, where further increases in marketing effort
would have little effect. Market potential is the limit approached by market demand as industry
marketing expenditures approach infinity for a given marketing environment.
The phrase “for a given market environment” is crucial. Consider the market potential for automobiles. It’s higher during prosperity than during a recession. The dependence of market potential
on the environment is illustrated in
Figure 3.3(b). Market analysts distinguish between the position of the market demand function and movement along it. Companies cannot do anything
about the position of the market demand function, which is determined by the marketing environment. However, they influence their particular location on the function when they decide how
much to spend on marketing.
Companies interested in market potential have a special interest in the product-penetration
percentage, the percentage of ownership or use of a product or service in a population. Companies
assume that the lower the product-penetration percentage, the higher the market potential,
although this also assumes everyone will eventually be in the market for every product.
COMPANY DEMAND Company demand is the company’s estimated share of market
demand at alternative levels of company marketing effort in a given time period. It depends on how
the company’s products, services, prices, and communications are perceived relative to the
competitors’. Other things equal, the company’s market share depends on the relative scale and
effectiveness of its market expenditures. Marketing model builders have developed sales response
functions to measure how a company’s sales are affected by its marketing expenditure level,
marketing mix, and marketing effectiveness.54
COMPANY SALES FORECAST Once marketers have estimated company demand, their next
task is to choose a level of marketing effort. The company sales forecast is the expected level of
company sales based on a chosen marketing plan and an assumed marketing environment.
We represent the company sales forecast graphically with sales on the vertical axis and marketing effort on the horizontal axis, as in Figure 3.3. We often hear that the company should develop
its marketing plan on the basis of its sales forecast. This forecast-to-plan sequence is valid if
forecast means an estimate of national economic activity, or if company demand is nonexpansible.
The sequence is not valid, however, where market demand is expansible or where forecast means
an estimate of company sales. The company sales forecast does not establish a basis for deciding
what to spend on marketing. On the contrary, the sales forecast is the result of an assumed marketing expenditure plan.
Two other concepts are important here. A sales quota is the sales goal set for a product line, company division, or sales representative. It is primarily a managerial device for defining and stimulating
sales effort, often set slightly higher than estimated sales to stretch the sales force’s effort.
A sales budget is a conservative estimate of the expected volume of sales, primarily for making
current purchasing, production, and cash flow decisions. It’s based on the need to avoid excessive
risk and is generally set slightly lower than the sales forecast.

COMPANY SALES POTENTIAL Company sales potential is the sales limit approached by
company demand as company marketing effort increases relative to that of competitors. The
absolute limit of company demand is, of course, the market potential. The two would be equal if
the company got 100 percent of the market. In most cases, company sales potential is less than the

| CHAPTER 3

87

88

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

market potential, even when company marketing expenditures increase considerably. Each
competitor has a hard core of loyal buyers unresponsive to other companies’ efforts to woo them.

Estimating Current Demand
We are now ready to examine practical methods for estimating current market demand. Marketing
executives want to estimate total market potential, area market potential, and total industry sales
and market shares.

TOTAL MARKET POTENTIAL Total market potential is the maximum sales available to all
firms in an industry during a given period, under a given level of industry marketing effort and
environmental conditions. A common way to estimate total market potential is to multiply the
potential number of buyers by the average quantity each purchases, times the price.
If 100 million people buy books each year, and the average book buyer buys three books a year
at an average price of $20 each, then the total market potential for books is $6 billion (100 million ⫻
3 ⫻ $20). The most difficult component to estimate is the number of buyers. We can always start with
the total population in the nation, say, 261 million people. Next we eliminate groups that obviously
would not buy the product. Assume illiterate people and children under 12 don’t buy books and
constitute 20 percent of the population. This means 80 percent of the population, or 209 million
people, are in the potentials pool. Further research might tell us that people of low income and low
education don’t buy books, and they constitute over 30 percent of the potentials pool. Eliminating
them, we arrive at a prospect pool of approximately 146.3 million book buyers. We use this number to
calculate total market potential.
A variation on this method is the chain-ratio method, which multiplies a base number by
several adjusting percentages. Suppose a brewery is interested in estimating the market potential for a new light beer especially designed to accompany food. It can make an estimate with the
following calculation:

Demand
for the new ⫻ Population ⫻
light beer

Average
percentage of
personal
discretionary
income per
capita spent
on food

Average
Average
Average
Expected
percentage of
percentage of
percentage of
percentage of
amount spent
amount spent on
amount spent
amount spent
⫻ on food that is ⫻ beverages that is ⫻ on alcoholic ⫻ on beer that
spent on
spent on alcoholic
beverages that
will be spent on
beverages
beverages
is spent on beer
light beer

AREA MARKET POTENTIAL Because companies must allocate their marketing budget
optimally among their best territories, they need to estimate the market potential of different cities,
states, and nations. Two major methods are the market-buildup method, used primarily by
business marketers, and the multiple-factor index method, used primarily by consumer marketers.
Market-Buildup Method The market-buildup method calls for identifying all the potential
buyers in each market and estimating their potential purchases. It produces accurate results if we
have a list of all potential buyers and a good estimate of what each will buy. Unfortunately, this
information is not always easy to gather.
Consider a machine-tool company that wants to estimate the area market potential for its wood
lathe in the Boston area. Its first step is to identify all potential buyers of wood lathes in the area,
primarily manufacturing establishments that shape or ream wood as part of their operations. The
company could compile a list from a directory of all manufacturing establishments in the area.
Then it could estimate the number of lathes each industry might purchase, based on the number of
lathes per thousand employees or per $1 million of sales in that industry.
An efficient method of estimating area market potentials makes use of the North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS), developed by the U.S. Bureau of the Census in conjunction
with the Canadian and Mexican governments.55 The NAICS classifies all manufacturing into
20 major industry sectors and further breaks each sector into a six-digit, hierarchical structure
as follows.

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

51

Industry sector (information)

513
5133

Industry subsector (broadcasting and telecommunications)
Industry group (telecommunications)

51332

Industry (wireless telecommunications carriers, except satellite)

513321

National industry (U.S. paging)

For each six-digit NAICS number, a company can purchase CD-ROMs of business directories
that provide complete company profiles of millions of establishments, subclassified by location,
number of employees, annual sales, and net worth.
To use the NAICS, the lathe manufacturer must first determine the six-digit NAICS codes that
represent products whose manufacturers are likely to require lathe machines. To get a full picture of
all six-digit NAICS industries that might use lathes, the company can (1) determine past customers’ NAICS codes; (2) go through the NAICS manual and check off all the six-digit industries
that might have an interest in lathes; (3) mail questionnaires to a wide range of companies inquiring about their interest in wood lathes.
The company’s next task is to determine an appropriate base for estimating the number of
lathes each industry will use. Suppose customer industry sales are the most appropriate base. Once
the company estimates the rate of lathe ownership relative to the customer industry’s sales, it can
compute the market potential.

Multiple-Factor Index Method Like business marketers, consumer companies also need to
estimate area market potentials, but since their customers are too numerous to list they commonly
use a straightforward index. A drug manufacturer might assume the market potential for drugs is
directly related to population size. If the state of Virginia has 2.55 percent of the U.S. population,
Virginia might be a market for 2.55 percent of total drugs sold.
A single factor is rarely a complete indicator of sales opportunity. Regional drug sales are also influenced by per capita income and the number of physicians per 10,000 people. Thus, it makes sense
to develop a multiple-factor index and assign each factor a specific weight. Suppose Virginia has
2.00 percent of U.S. disposable personal income, 1.96 percent of U.S. retail sales, and 2.28 percent of
U.S. population, and the respective weights are 0.5, 0.3, and 0.2. The buying-power index for Virginia
is then 2.04 [0.5(2.00) ⫹ 0.3(1.96) ⫹ 0.2(2.28)]. Thus 2.04 percent of the nation’s drug sales (not
2.28 percent) might be expected to take place in Virginia.
The weights in the buying-power index are somewhat arbitrary, and companies can assign others if appropriate. A manufacturer might adjust the market potential for additional factors, such as
competitors’ presence, local promotional costs, seasonal factors, and market idiosyncrasies.
Many companies compute area indexes to allocate marketing resources. Suppose the drug company is reviewing the six cities listed in
Table 3.5. The first two columns show its percentage of
U.S. brand and category sales in these six cities. Column 3 shows the brand development index
(BDI), the index of brand sales to category sales. Seattle has a BDI of 114 because the brand is

TABLE 3.5

Calculating the Brand Development Index (BDI)
(a) Percent
of U.S. Brand

(b) Percent of
U.S. Category

BDI

Territory

Sales

Sales

(a ÷ b) × 100

Seattle

3.09

2.71

114

Portland
Boston

6.74
3.49

10.41
3.85

65
91

Toledo
Chicago

.97
1.13

.81
.81

120
140

Baltimore

3.12

3.00

104

| CHAPTER 3

89

90

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

relatively more developed than the category in Seattle. Portland’s BDI is 65, which means the brand
is relatively underdeveloped there.
Normally, the lower the BDI, the higher the market opportunity, in that there is room to grow
the brand. Other marketers would argue instead that marketing funds should go into the brand’s
strongest markets, where it might be important to reinforce loyalty or more easily capture additional brand share. Investment decisions should be based on the potential to grow brand sales.
Feeling it was underperforming in a high-potential market, Anheuser-Busch targeted the growing
Hispanic population in Texas with a number of special marketing activities. Cross-promotions
with Budweiser and Clamato tomato clam cocktail (to mix the popular Michiladas drink), sponsorship of the Esta Noche Toca concert series, and support of Latin music acts with three-on-three
soccer tournaments helped drive higher sales.56
After the company decides on the city-by-city allocation of its budget, it can refine each city allocation down to census tracts or zip⫹4 code centers. Census tracts are small, locally defined statistical areas in metropolitan areas and some other counties. They generally have stable boundaries
and a population of about 4,000. Zip⫹4 code centers (designed by the U.S. Post Office) are a little
larger than neighborhoods. Data on population size, median family income, and other characteristics are available for these geographical units. Using other sources such as loyalty card data,
Mediabrands’s Geomentum targets “hyper-local” sectors of zip codes, city blocks, or even individual households with ad messages delivered via interactive TV, zoned editions of newspapers, Yellow
Pages, outdoor media, and local Internet searches.57

INDUSTRY SALES AND MARKET SHARES Besides estimating total potential and area
potential, a company needs to know the actual industry sales taking place in its market. This means
identifying competitors and estimating their sales.
The industry trade association will often collect and publish total industry sales, although it
usually does not list individual company sales separately. With this information, however, each
company can evaluate its own performance against the industry’s. If a company’s sales are increasing by 5 percent a year and industry sales are increasing by 10 percent, the company is losing its
relative standing in the industry.
Another way to estimate sales is to buy reports from a marketing research firm that audits total
sales and brand sales. Nielsen Media Research audits retail sales in various supermarket and drugstore product categories. A company can purchase this information and compare its performance
to the total industry or any competitor to see whether it is gaining or losing share, overall or brand
by brand. Because distributors typically will not supply information about how much of competitors’ products they are selling, business-to-business marketers operate with less knowledge of their
market share results.

Estimating Future Demand
The few products or services that lend themselves to easy forecasting generally enjoy an absolute
level or a fairly constant trend, and competition that is either nonexistent (public utilities) or stable (pure oligopolies). In most markets, in contrast, good forecasting is a key factor in success.
Companies commonly prepare a macroeconomic forecast first, followed by an industry forecast, followed by a company sales forecast. The macroeconomic forecast projects inflation, unemployment, interest rates, consumer spending, business investment, government expenditures, net
exports, and other variables. The end result is a forecast of gross domestic product (GDP), which
the firm uses, along with other environmental indicators, to forecast industry sales. The company
derives its sales forecast by assuming it will win a certain market share.
How do firms develop their forecasts? They may create their own or buy forecasts from outside
sources such as marketing research firms, which interview customers, distributors, and other knowledgeable parties. Specialized forecasting firms produce long-range forecasts of particular macroenvironmental components, such as population, natural resources, and technology. Examples are IHS
Global Insight (a merger of Data Resources and Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates),
Forrester Research, and the Gartner Group. Futurist research firms produce speculative scenarios;
three such firms are the Institute for the Future, Hudson Institute, and the Futures Group.
All forecasts are built on one of three information bases: what people say, what people do, or what
people have done. Using what people say requires surveying buyers’ intentions, composites of sales
force opinions, and expert opinion. Building a forecast on what people do means putting the product

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

into a test market to measure buyer response. To use the final basis—what people have done—firms
analyze records of past buying behavior or use time-series analysis or statistical demand analysis.

SURVEY OF BUYERS’ INTENTIONS Forecasting is the art of anticipating what buyers are
likely to do under a given set of conditions. For major consumer durables such as appliances,
research organizations conduct periodic surveys of consumer buying intentions, ask questions like
Do you intend to buy an automobile within the next six months? and put the answers on a purchase
probability scale:

0.00
No
chance

0.20
Slight
possibility

0.40
Fair
possibility

0.60
Good
possibility

0.80
High
possibility

1.00
Certain

Surveys also inquire into consumers’ present and future personal finances and expectations about
the economy. They combine bits of information into a consumer confidence measure (Conference
Board) or a consumer sentiment measure (Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan).
For business buying, research firms can carry out buyer-intention surveys for plant, equipment,
and materials, usually falling within a 10 percent margin of error. These surveys are useful in estimating demand for industrial products, consumer durables, product purchases where advanced
planning is required, and new products. Their value increases to the extent that buyers are few, the
cost of reaching them is low, and they have clear intentions they willingly disclose and implement.

COMPOSITE OF SALES FORCE OPINIONS When buyer interviewing is impractical, the
company may ask its sales representatives to estimate their future sales. Few companies use these
estimates without making some adjustments, however. Sales representatives might be pessimistic
or optimistic, they might not know how their company’s marketing plans will influence future sales
in their territory, and they might deliberately underestimate demand so the company will set a low
sales quota. To encourage better estimating, the company could offer incentives or assistance, such
as information about marketing plans or past forecasts compared to actual sales.
Sales force forecasts yield a number of benefits. Sales reps might have better insight into developing trends than any other group, and forecasting might give them greater confidence in their
sales quotas and more incentive to achieve them. A “grassroots” forecasting procedure provides
detailed estimates broken down by product, territory, customer, and sales rep.
EXPERT OPINION Companies can also obtain forecasts from experts, including dealers,
distributors, suppliers, marketing consultants, and trade associations. Dealer estimates are subject
to the same strengths and weaknesses as sales force estimates. Many companies buy economic and
industry forecasts from well-known economic-forecasting firms that have more data available and
more forecasting expertise.
Occasionally, companies will invite a group of experts to prepare a forecast. The experts
exchange views and produce an estimate as a group (group-discussion method) or individually, in
which case another analyst might combine them into a single estimate (pooling of individual estimates). Further rounds of estimating and refining follow (the Delphi method).58
PAST-SALES ANALYSIS Firms can develop sales forecasts on the basis of past sales. Timeseries analysis breaks past time series into four components (trend, cycle, seasonal, and erratic) and
projects them into the future. Exponential smoothing projects the next period’s sales by combining an
average of past sales and the most recent sales, giving more weight to the latter. Statistical demand
analysis measures the impact of a set of causal factors (such as income, marketing expenditures, and
price) on the sales level. Finally, econometric analysis builds sets of equations that describe a system
and statistically derives the different parameters that make up the equations statistically.
MARKET-TEST METHOD When buyers don’t plan their purchases carefully, or experts
are unavailable or unreliable, a direct-market test can help forecast new-product sales or
established product sales in a new distribution channel or territory. (We discuss market testing in
detail in Chapter 20.)

| CHAPTER 3

91

92

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Summary
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

To carry out their analysis, planning, implementation,
and control responsibilities, marketing managers need
a marketing information system (MIS). The role of the
MIS is to assess the managers’ information needs,
develop the needed information, and distribute that information in a timely manner.
An MIS has three components: (a) an internal records
system, which includes information on the order-topayment cycle and sales information systems; (b) a
marketing intelligence system, a set of procedures
and sources used by managers to obtain everyday information about pertinent developments in the marketing environment; and (c) a marketing research system that allows for the systematic design, collection,
analysis, and reporting of data and findings relevant to
a specific marketing situation.
Marketers find many opportunities by identifying
trends (directions or sequences of events that have
some momentum and durability) and megatrends
(major social, economic, political, and technological
changes that have long-lasting influence).
Within the rapidly changing global picture, marketers
must monitor six major environmental forces: demographic, economic, social-cultural, natural, technological, and political-legal.
In the demographic environment, marketers must be
aware of worldwide population growth; changing
mixes of age, ethnic composition, and educational levels; the rise of nontraditional families; and large geographic shifts in population.
In the economic arena, marketers need to focus on income distribution and levels of savings, debt, and
credit availability.

7.

In the social-cultural arena, marketers must understand people’s views of themselves, others, organizations, society, nature, and the universe. They must
market products that correspond to society’s core
and secondary values and address the needs of different subcultures within a society.
8. In the natural environment, marketers need to be
aware of the public’s increased concern about the
health of the environment. Many marketers are now
embracing sustainability and green marketing programs that provide better environmental solutions as
a result.
9. In the technological arena, marketers should take
account of the accelerating pace of technological
change, opportunities for innovation, varying R&D
budgets, and the increased governmental regulation
brought about by technological change.
10. In the political-legal environment, marketers must
work within the many laws regulating business
practices and with various special-interest
groups.
11. There are two types of demand: market demand and
company demand. To estimate current demand, companies attempt to determine total market potential,
area market potential, industry sales, and market
share. To estimate future demand, companies survey
buyers’ intentions, solicit their sales force’s input,
gather expert opinions, analyze past sales, or engage
in market testing. Mathematical models, advanced
statistical techniques, and computerized data collection procedures are essential to all types of demand
and sales forecasting.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is Consumer Behavior More a Function
of a Person’s Age or Generation?
One of the widely debated issues in developing marketing
programs that target certain age groups is how much consumers change over time. Some marketers maintain that
age differences are critical and that the needs and wants of
a 25-year-old in 2010 are not that different from those of a
25-year-old in 1980. Others argue that cohort and generation effects are critical, and that marketing programs must
therefore suit the times.

Take a position: Age differences are fundamentally
more important than cohort effects versus Cohort
effects can dominate age differences.

Marketing Discussion
Age Targeting
What brands and products do you feel successfully “speak
to you” and effectively target your age group? Why? Which
ones do not? What could they do better?

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

Marketing Excellence

>>Microsoft

Microsoft is the
world’s most successful software company. The company was founded by Bill Gates and Paul
Allen in 1975 with the original mission of having “a computer on every desk and in every home, running Microsoft
software.” Since then, Microsoft has grown to become the
third most valuable brand in the world through strategic
marketing and aggressive growth tactics.
Microsoft’s first significant success occurred in the
early 1980s with the creation of the DOS operating system for IBM computers. The company used this initial
success with IBM to sell software to other manufacturers,
quickly making Microsoft a major player in the industry.
Initial advertising efforts focused on communicating the
company’s range of products from DOS to the launch of
Excel and Windows—all under a unified “Microsoft” look.
Microsoft went public in 1986 and grew tremendously
over the next decade as the Windows operating system
and Microsoft Office took off. In 1990, Microsoft launched
a completely revamped version of its operating system
and named it Windows 3.0. Windows 3.0 offered an improved set of Windows icons and applications like File
Manager and Program Manager that are still used today. It
was an instant success; Microsoft sold more than 10 million copies of the software within two years—a phenomenon in those days. In addition, Windows 3.0 became the
first operating system to be preinstalled on certain PCs,
marking a major milestone in the industry and for
Microsoft.
Throughout the 1990s, Microsoft’s communication
efforts convinced businesses that its software was not
only the best choice for business but also that it needed
to be upgraded frequently. Microsoft spent millions of dollars in magazine advertising and received endorsements
from the top computer magazines in the industry, making
Microsoft Windows and Office the must-have software of
its time. Microsoft successfully launched Windows 95 in

| CHAPTER 3

93

1995 and Windows 98 in 1998, using the slogan, “Where
Do You Want to Go Today?” The slogan didn’t push individual products but rather the company itself, which could
help empower companies and consumers alike.
During the late 1990s, Microsoft entered the notorious “browser wars” as companies struggled to find their
place during the Internet boom. In 1995, Netscape
launched its Navigator browser over the Internet.
Realizing what a good product Netscape had, Microsoft
launched the first version of its own browser, Internet
Explorer, later that same year. By 1997, Netscape held a
72 percent share and Explorer an 18 percent share. Five
years later, however, Netscape’s share had fallen to
4 percent.
During those five years, Microsoft took three major
steps to overtake the competition. First, it bundled
Internet Explorer with its Office product, which included
Excel, Word, and PowerPoint. Automatically, consumers
who wanted MS Office became Explorer users as well.
Second, Microsoft partnered with AOL, which opened
the doors to 5 million new consumers almost overnight.
And, finally, Microsoft used its deep pockets to ensure
that Internet Explorer was available free, essentially “cutting off Netscape’s air supply.” These efforts, however,
were not without controversy. Microsoft faced antitrust
charges in 1998 and numerous lawsuits based on its
marketing tactics, and some perceived that it was
monopolizing the industry.
Charges aside, the company’s stock took off, peaking in 1999 at $60 per share. Microsoft released Windows
2000 in 2000 and Windows XP in 2001. It also launched
Xbox in 2001, marking the company’s entrance into the
multibillion-dollar gaming industry.
Over the next several years, Microsoft’s stock price
dipped by over $40 a share as consumers waited for the
next operating system and Apple made a significant
comeback with several new Mac computers, the iPod,
the iPhone, and iTunes. Microsoft launched the Vista operating system in 2007 to great expectations; however, it
was plagued with bugs and problems.
As the recession worsened in 2008, the company
found itself in a bind. Its brand image was tarnished from
years of Apple’s successful “Get a Mac” campaign, a series
of commercials that featured a smart, creative, easygoing
Mac character alongside a geeky, virus-prone, uptight PC
character. In addition, consumers and analysts continued
to slam Vista for its poor performance.
In response, Microsoft created a campaign entitled
“Windows. Life Without Walls” to help turn its image
around. The company focused on how cost effective
computers with its software were, a message that resonated well in the recession. It launched a series of
commercials boasting “I’m a PC” that began with
a Microsoft employee (looking very similar to the PC

94

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

character from the Apple ads) stating, “Hello, I’m a PC
and I’ve been made into a stereotype.” The commercials, which highlighted a wide variety of individuals who
prided themselves on being PC owners, helped improve
employee morale and customer loyalty.
Microsoft opened a handful of retail stores—similar to
Apple stores—in 2009. “The purpose of opening these
stores is to create deeper engagement with consumers
and continue to learn firsthand about what they want and
how they buy,” Microsoft said in a statement.
Today, the company offers a wide range of software
and home entertainment products. In the ongoing
browser wars, Internet Explorer holds a 66 percent market share compared to Firefox’s 22 percent and Safari’s
8 percent. In 2009, Microsoft launched a new search
engine called Bing, which challenges Google’s dominant
position in the marketplace and claims to give better
search results. Microsoft’s most profitable products continue to be Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Office,

Marketing Excellence

>>Walmart

Walmart, the giant chain of discount stores, is the second largest company in the
world, with over $400 billion in revenue and 2.1 million
associates (or employees). The phenomenal success
story began in 1962 when Sam Walton opened up his
first discount store in Rogers, Arkansas. He sold the
same products as his competitors but kept prices lower
by reducing his profit margin. His customers quickly
caught on and the company took off almost immediately. Walton’s EDLP (Every Day Low Price) strategy remains the foundation of Walmart’s success today.
Through the company’s economies of scale, Walmart is
able to offer customers top brand-name products for
the lowest price.

which bring in approximately 90 percent of the company’s
$60 billion in revenue.
Questions
1. Evaluate Microsoft’s strategy in good and poor economic times.
2. Discuss the pros and cons of Microsoft’s most
recent “I’m a PC” campaign. Is Microsoft doing a
good thing by acknowledging Apple’s campaign in
its own marketing message? Why or why not?
Sources: Burt Helm, “Best Global Brands,” BusinessWeek, September 18, 2008; Stuart Elliot,
“Microsoft Takes a User-Friendly Approach to Selling Its Image in a New Global Campaign,” New
York Times, November 11, 1994; “Todd Bishop, “The Rest of the Motto,” Seattle Post Intelligencer,
September 23, 2004; Devin Leonard, “Hey PC, Who Taught You to Fight Back?” New York Times,
August 30, 2009; Suzanne Vranica and Robert A. Guth, “Microsoft Enlists Jerry Seinfeld in Its Ad
Battle Against Apple,” Wall Street Journal, August 21, 2008, p. A1; Stuart Elliott, “Echoing the
Campaign of a Rival, Microsoft Aims to Redefine ‘I’m a PC,’” New York Times, September 18, 2008,
p. C4; John Furguson, “From Cola Wars to Computer Wars—Microsoft Misses Again,”
BN Branding, April 4, 2009.

Walmart expanded throughout the United States in the
1970s and 1980s by acquiring some of its competitors and
opening new stores. The first Walmart Supercenter—a discount store with food outlets, an optical center, photo lab,
hair salon, among other amenities—opened in 1988. By
1990, Walmart had become the nation’s number one retailer, with $32 billion in revenue and stores in 33 states.
The company’s international expansion began with a store
outside Mexico City in 1991 and has grown to over 3,800
international locations, some under a different brand name.
Walmart thrives on three basic beliefs and values:
“Respect for the Individual,” “Service to Our Customers,”
and “Striving for Excellence.” Sam Walton’s original 10-foot
rule—“I promise that whenever I come within 10 feet of a
customer, I will look him in the eye, greet him, and ask if I
can help him.”—still governs today, embodied by the
“greeters” at the front door. In addition, Walmart embraces
the communities in which it enters in order to develop
strong local relationships and build its brand image in the
area. The company donates significant amounts of money
to local charities through its “Good Works” program, hires
local individuals, and purchases food from local farmers.
Walmart’s marketing strategy has evolved over the years.
Early marketing efforts were based on word of mouth, positive PR, and aggressive store expansion. In 1992, Walmart introduced its well-known tagline, “Always Low Prices.
Always,” which effectively communicated the company’s
core brand promise and resonated with millions. In 1996,
Walmart launched its price rollback campaign featuring the
familiar yellow smiley face as the star of the campaign. The
smiley face happily slashed prices in Walmart’s television
commercials and appeared on store signage as well as

COLLECTING INFORMATION AND FORECASTING DEMAND

employees’ aprons and buttons. The campaign helped
Walmart’s stock soar 1173 percent in the 1990s.
Walmart hit a few bumps in the road as it entered the
21st century, and critics protested its entry into small
communities. In one study at Iowa State University, researchers found that within 10 years of a new Walmart
store opening, up to one-half of the small stores in that
town can disappear. Walmart also faced multiple lawsuits
from employees who complained about poor work conditions, exposure to health hazards, and pay below minimum wage, which left employees with families below the
poverty line. In some cases, employees said Walmart
failed to pay for overtime and prevented them from taking
rest or lunch breaks. Another lawsuit claimed the company discriminated against women in awarding pay and
promotions. These problems led to a very high turnover
rate in the 2000s. According to one Walmart survey,
70 percent of employees left the company within the first
year of employment due to lack of recognition and inadequate pay.
From 2000 to 2005, Walmart’s stock price fell
27 percent and remained low from 2005 to 2007. Negative
backlash, combined with Target’s reemergence on the
retail scene, contributed to the decline. Target revamped its
stores, merchandise, and marketing strategy to appeal to a
more aspirational discount buyer and stole some of
Walmart’s top-tier customers. Target stores were nicely lit,
offering wider aisles and better-displayed merchandise.
Target’s television commercials featured attractive models
and trendy clothes from high-end designers such as Isaac
Mizrahi and Liz Lange. One analyst stated, “Target tends to
have more upscale customers who don’t feel the effects of
gasoline prices and other economic factors as much as
Walmart’s core customers might.” From 2003 to 2007,
Target outperformed Walmart in same-store sales growth
by 1.7 percent and profit growth by 5.7 percent. During this
time, Walmart also lost the exclusive rights to use the smiley face in its marketing campaign.
For all these—and other—reasons, Walmart decided it was time for a new direction and launched a
series of new initiatives to help improve sales and its image. First, it introduced a highly successful $4 generic
drug campaign, a program eventually copied by Target.
Walmart also launched several environmentally friendly
initiatives such as constructing new buildings from recycled materials, cutting transportation costs and energy
usage, and encouraging customers to buy more green
products.
In 2007, Walmart introduced a new marketing campaign and tagline, “Save Money. Live Better.” Television
commercials highlighted the company’s positive impact on
decreased energy costs, increased 401(k) (retirement) savings, good employee health care coverage, and increased

| CHAPTER 3

95

family savings. One commercial stated, “In today’s economy, nobody’s more committed to helping family budgets
go further than Walmart. Walmart saves the average family
about $3,100 a year, no matter where they shop.”
Walmart also used the new campaign and aggressive price cuts to attract new consumers affected by the
recession. It slashed prices on popular toys and electronics during the holidays and implemented a massive store
remodeling effort called Project Impact. As a result,
stores became cleaner, aisles less cluttered, and merchandise easier to reach—all to help improve the overall
shopping experience and steal customers from Target.
Walmart’s tactics worked: Same-store sales rose and
its stock price improved during the recession. Analysts
explained that Walmart’s product mix—45 percent
consumables (food, beauty, health items)—is a better
strategy in a poor economy than Target’s product mix—
20 percent consumables and 40 percent home and apparel
products. One analyst said, “Walmart sells what you need
to have as opposed to what you want to have.”
Stephen Quinn, Walmart’s CMO, stated, “We are fortunate that this recession came along. It played to our positioning really well. But our own insecurity is that all the
credit would go to the external environment and none of
the work we all did. The kinds of things we were working
on anyway when this environment came along are the
same things we need to do to keep these so-called new
customers and I think continued to build loyalty with our
existing base.”
Today, Walmart has stores in 16 international markets
and serves more than 200 million customers a week
through its variety of discount stores. These include
Walmart Supercenters, Discount Stores, Neighborhood
Markets, and Sam’s Club warehouses.
Questions
1. Evaluate Walmart’s new marketing campaign and
tagline. Did the company make the right decision to
drop “Always Low Prices. Always.” as a tagline? Why
or why not?
2. Walmart does very well when the economy turns
sour. How can it protect itself when the economy is
on the rise? Explain.
Sources: Dave Goldiner, “Exxon Tops Wal-Mart on 2009 Fortune 500 List,” New York Daily News,
April 20, 2009; “Wal-Mart Seeks Smiley Face Fights,” BBC News, August 5, 2006; David Ng,
“Wal-Mart vs. Target,” Forbes, December 13, 2004; Michael Barbaro, “A New Weapon for
Wal-Mart: A War Room,” New York Times, November 1, 2005; Kenneth E. Stone, “Impact of the
Wal-Mart Phenomenon on Rural Communities,” Increasing Understanding of Public Problems and
Policies (Chicago: Farm Foundation, 1997), pp. 189–200; Suzanne Kapner, “Wal-mart Enters the
Ad Age,” CNNMoney.com, August 17, 2008; Jack Neff, “Why Walmart Is Getting Serious About
Marketing,” Advertising Age, June 8, 2009; Sean Gregory, “Walmart’s Project Impact: A Move to
Crush Competition,”Time, September 9, 2009; “Store Wars: When Wal-Mart Comes to Town,” PBS,
February 24, 2007; Sean Gregory, “Wal-Mart vs. Target: No Contest in the Recession,” Time,
March 14, 2009.

96

PART 2

r
e
t
ap
h
C

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

4

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What constitutes good marketing research?
2. What are the best metrics for measuring marketing
productivity?
3. How can marketers assess their return on investment of marketing
expenditures?

Insightful consumer research helped
Kimberly-Clark improve its Huggies diapers
and gain share in the market.

Conducting Marketing
Research
Good marketers need insights to help them interpret past performance as
well as plan future activities. To make the best possible tactical decisions in the short run and
strategic decisions in the long run, they need timely, accurate, and actionable information about
consumers, competition, and their brands. Discovering a consumer insight and understanding
its marketing implications can often lead to a successful product launch or spur the growth of
a brand.

A series of novel consumer innovations through the years—including Kleenex facial tissues, Kotex feminine napkins, and others—have transformed Kimberly-Clark from a
paper mill company to a consumer products powerhouse. Among the company’s recent
successes was Huggies Supreme Natural Fit, named one of the most successful new
product launches in 2007. Nearly three years of research and design were invested in
the creation of the new diaper. After assembling a sample of new mothers from different parts of the
country with different income backgrounds and ethnicities, Kimberly-Clark’s marketers conducted inhome interviews and placed motion-activated cameras in homes to learn about diaper-changing routines. Seeing new moms constantly struggle to straighten a squirming baby’s legs when putting on a
diaper led to the insight that the new diaper also needed to be shaped to better follow the curves of
a baby’s body. Because mothers said they wanted their older babies to feel like they weren’t wearing
a diaper, the new diaper also had to be thinner with a closer fit, so new polymers cut the width of the
imbedded absorbent by 16 percent and stretch was added to the back waistband. When research
also revealed that moms often used the cartoon graphics on another diaper to distract the baby
during a diaper change, more active images of Disney-licensed Winnie the Pooh characters were
added. The successful launch of the research-inspired innovation
boosted Kimberly-Clark’s market share by one to two percentage In this chapter, we review the steps in the marketing
points and significantly contributed to the company’s $4 billion-plus research process. We also consider how marketers can develop
effective metrics for measuring marketing productivity.
sales in diapers that year.1

The Marketing Research System
Marketing managers often commission formal marketing studies of specific problems and opportunities. They may request a market survey, a product-preference test, a sales forecast by region, or an
advertising evaluation. It’s the job of the marketing researcher to produce insight into the customer’s
attitudes and buying behavior. Marketing insights provide diagnostic information about how and
why we observe certain effects in the marketplace, and what that means to marketers.2
Good marketing insights often form the basis of successful marketing programs. When an extensive consumer research study of U.S. retail shoppers by Walmart revealed that the store’s key
competitive advantages were the functional benefit of “offers low prices” and the emotional benefit
97

98

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

of “makes me feel like a smart shopper,” its marketers used those insights to develop their “Save
Money, Live Better” campaign. Gillette’s Venus razor has become the most successful female shaving line ever—holding more than 50 percent of the global women’s shaving market—as a result of
insightful consumer research that led to product design, packaging, and advertising cues that better
satisfied female shaving needs.3

Venus Razor

As part of a $300 million budget for the development of its first
razor designed solely for women, Gillette conducted extensive consumer research and performed numerous market tests. The razor, called Venus, was a marked departure from previous
women’s razor designs, which had essentially been colored or repackaged versions of men’s
razors. After research revealed that women change their grip on a razor about 30 times during
each shaving session, Gillette designed the Venus with a wide, sculpted rubberized handle offering superior
grip and control, and an oval-shaped blade in a storage case that could stick to shower walls. Research also
indicated that women were reluctant to leave the shower in order to
replace a dull blade, so the case was made to hold spare blade cartridges.
When Gillette research later revealed four distinct segments of women
shavers—perfect shave seekers (no missed hairs), skin pamperers, pragmatic functionalists, and EZ seekers—the company designed Venus
products for each of them.

Extensive consumer research was
crucial to the success of Gillette’s
Venus series of razors designed
exclusively for women.

Gaining marketing insights is crucial for marketing success.
If marketers lack consumer insights, they often get in trouble. When
Tropicana redesigned its orange juice packaging, dropping the iconic
image of an orange skewered by a straw, it failed to adequately test
for consumer reactions, with disastrous results. Sales dropped by
20 percent, and Tropicana reinstated the old package design after
only a few months.4
We define marketing research as the systematic design, collection,
analysis, and reporting of data and findings relevant to a specific marketing situation facing the company. Spending on marketing research topped $28 billion globally in
2009, according to ESOMAR, the world association of opinion and market research professionals.5
Most large companies have their own marketing research departments, which often play crucial
roles within the organization. Procter & Gamble’s Consumer & Market Knowledge (CMK) market
research function has dedicated CMK groups working for P&G businesses around the world to
improve both their brand strategies and program execution, as well as a relatively smaller, centralized corporate CMK group that focuses on a variety of big-picture concerns that transcend any specific line of business.
Marketing research, however, is not limited to large companies with big budgets and marketing
research departments. Often at much smaller companies, everyone carries out marketing research—
including the customers. Small companies can also hire the services of a marketing research firm or
conduct research in creative and affordable ways, such as:
1.

2.
3.
4.

Engaging students or professors to design and carry out projects—Companies such as
American Express, Booz Allen Hamilton, GE, Hilton Hotels, IBM, Mars, Price Chopper, and
Whirlpool engage in “crowdcasting” and are sponsors of competitions such as the Innovation
Challenge, where top MBA students compete in teams. The payoff to the students is experience and visibility; the payoff to the companies is a fresh sets of eyes to solve problems at a
fraction of what consultants would charge.6
Using the Internet—A company can collect considerable information at very little cost by
examining competitors’ Web sites, monitoring chat rooms, and accessing published data.
Checking out rivals—Many small businesses, such as restaurants, hotels, or specialty retailers,
routinely visit competitors to learn about changes they have made.
Tapping into marketing partner expertise—Marketing research firms, ad agencies, distributors, and other marketing partners may be able to share relevant market knowledge they have
accumulated. Those partners targeting small or medium-sized businesses may be especially

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

| CHAPTER 4

helpful. For example, to promote more shipping to China, UPS conducted several in-depth
surveys of the Chinese market to portray its complexities but also its opportunities for even
small and medium-sized businesses.7
Most companies use a combination of marketing research resources to study their industries,
competitors, audiences, and channel strategies. Companies normally budget marketing research at
1 percent to 2 percent of company sales and spend a large percentage of that on the services of outside firms. Marketing research firms fall into three categories:
1.
2.
3.

Syndicated-service research firms—These firms gather consumer and trade information, which
they sell for a fee. Examples include the Nielsen Company, Kantar Group, Westat, and IRI.
Custom marketing research firms—These firms are hired to carry out specific projects. They
design the study and report the findings.
Specialty-line marketing research firms—These firms provide specialized research services.
The best example is the field-service firm, which sells field interviewing services to other firms.

To take advantage of all these different resources and practices, good marketers adopt a formal
marketing research process.

The Marketing Research
Process
Effective marketing research follows the six steps shown in
the following situation.8

Figure 4.1. We illustrate them in

American Airlines (AA) was one of the first companies to install phone handsets on its
planes. Now it’s reviewing many new ideas, especially to cater to its first-class passengers
on very long flights, mainly businesspeople whose high-priced tickets pay most of the
freight. Among these ideas are: (1) an Internet connection primarily for e-mail but with
some limited access to Web pages, (2) 24 channels of satellite cable TV, and (3) a 50-CD
audio system that lets each passenger create a customized in-flight play list. The marketing research manager was assigned to investigate how first-class passengers would rate
these services, specifically the Internet connection, and how much extra they would be
willing to pay for it. One source estimates revenues of $70 billion from in-flight
Internet access over 10 years, if enough first-class passengers paid $25. AA could thus recover its costs in a reasonable time. Making the connection available would cost the airline $90,000 per plane.9

Define the problem
and research objectives

Develop the
research plan

Collect the
information

Step 1: Define the Problem, the Decision Alternatives,
and the Research Objectives
Marketing managers must be careful not to define the problem too broadly or too narrowly for the
marketing researcher. A marketing manager who says, “Find out everything you can about firstclass air travelers’ needs,” will collect a lot of unnecessary information. One who says, “Find out
whether enough passengers aboard a B747 flying direct between Chicago and Tokyo would be willing to pay $25 for an Internet connection for American Airlines to break even in one year on the
cost of offering this service,” is taking too narrow a view of the problem.
The marketing researcher might even ask, “Why does the Internet connection have to be priced
at $25 as opposed to $15, $35, or some other price? Why does American have to break even on the
cost of the service, especially if it attracts new customers?” Another relevant question to ask is,
“How important is it to be first in the market, and how long can the company sustain its lead?”
The marketing manager and marketing researcher agreed to define the problem as follows: “Will
offering an in-flight Internet service create enough incremental preference and profit for American
Airlines to justify its cost against other possible investments in service enhancements American
might make?” To help in designing the research, management should first spell out the decisions it
might face and then work backward. Suppose management outlines these decisions: (1) Should
American offer an Internet connection? (2) If so, should we offer the service to first-class only, or

Analyze the
information

Present the
findings

Make the
decision

|Fig. 4.1|

The Marketing
Research Process

99

100

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

An airline looking to add in-flight
Internet service would need
to conduct careful consumer
research.

include business class, and possibly economy class? (3) What price(s) should we charge? (4) On
what types of planes and lengths of trips should we offer the service?
Now management and marketing researchers are ready to set specific research objectives:
(1) What types of first-class passengers would respond most to using an in-flight Internet
service? (2) How many first-class passengers are likely to use the Internet service at different
price levels? (3) How many extra first-class passengers might choose American because of this
new service? (4) How much long-term goodwill will this service add to American Airlines’
image? (5) How important is Internet service to first-class passengers relative to other services,
such as a power plug or enhanced entertainment?
Not all research projects can be this specific. Some research is exploratory—its goal is to shed
light on the real nature of the problem and to suggest possible solutions or new ideas. Some research is descriptive—it seeks to quantify demand, such as how many first-class passengers would
purchase in-flight Internet service at $25. Some research is causal—its purpose is to test a causeand-effect relationship.

Step 2: Develop the Research Plan
The second stage of marketing research is where we develop the most efficient plan for gathering
the needed information and what that will cost. Suppose American made a prior estimate that
launching in-flight Internet service would yield a long-term profit of $50,000. If the manager
believes that doing the marketing research will lead to an improved pricing and promotional plan
and a long-term profit of $90,000, he should be willing to spend up to $40,000 on this research. If
the research will cost more than $40,000, it’s not worth doing.10
To design a research plan, we need to make decisions about the data sources, research
approaches, research instruments, sampling plan, and contact methods.

DATA SOURCES The researcher can gather secondary data, primary data, or both. Secondary
data are data that were collected for another purpose and already exist somewhere. Primary data
are data freshly gathered for a specific purpose or for a specific research project.
Researchers usually start their investigation by examining some of the rich variety of low-cost
and readily available secondary data, to see whether they can partly or wholly solve the problem
without collecting costly primary data. For instance, auto advertisers looking to get a better return
on their online car ads might purchase a copy of J.D. Power and Associates’ semiannual Power Auto
Online Media Study, a survey that gives insights into who buys specific brands and where on the
Web advertisers can find them.11
When the needed data don’t exist or are dated, inaccurate, incomplete, or unreliable, the
researcher will need to collect primary data. Most marketing research projects do include some
primary-data collection.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

| CHAPTER 4

101

RESEARCH APPROACHES Marketers collect primary data in five main ways: through
observation, focus groups, surveys, behavioral data, and experiments.
Observational Research Researchers can gather fresh data by observing the relevant actors and
settings unobtrusively as they shop or consume products.12 Sometimes they equip consumers with
pagers and instruct them to write down what they’re doing whenever prompted, or they hold informal
interview sessions at a café or bar. Photographs can also provide a wealth of detailed information.
Ethnographic research is a particular observational research approach that uses concepts and
tools from anthropology and other social science disciplines to provide deep cultural understanding
of how people live and work.13 The goal is to immerse the researcher into consumers’ lives to uncover
unarticulated desires that might not surface in any other form of research.14 Firms such as Fujitsu
Laboratories, Herman Miller, IBM, Intel, Steelcase, and Xerox have embraced ethnographic research
to design breakthrough products. Here are three specific examples.
•

•

•

Bank of America’s ethnographic research that followed female baby boomers at home and
while they shopped yielded two insights—women rounded up financial transactions because it was more convenient, and those with children found it difficult to save. Subsequent
research led to the launch of “Keep the Change,” a debit card
program that rounded purchases up to the nearest dollar
amount and automatically transferred the added difference
from a checking to a savings account. Since the launch,
2.5 million customers have signed up for the program, opening 800,000 new checking accounts and 3 million new savings
accounts in the process.15
To boost sagging sales for its Orville Redenbacher popcorn,
ConAgra spent nine months observing families in their homes
and assembling their weekly diaries of how they felt about various
snacks. In reviewing the results, ConAgra found a key insight: the
essence of popcorn was that it was a “facilitator of interaction.”
Four nationwide TV ads followed with the tagline, “Spending
Time Together: That’s the Power of Orville Redenbacher.”16
When package design firm 4sight, Inc., was hired by PepsiCo
to come up with a new design for Gatorade’s 64-ounce package, its team initially assumed the package functioned as a
“family pack” to be used for multiple servings to multiple
users in the household. In watching moms in their homes,
however, team members were surprised to find them taking
the jug out of the refrigerator—for example, after a hard
workout—and chugging it right there on the spot! That insight led to a totally different package design, one that could
be easily gripped and grabbed.17

Ethnographic research isn’t limited to consumer companies in
developed markets. In a business-to-business setting, GE’s ethnographic research into the plastic-fiber industry revealed to the firm
that it wasn’t in a commodity business driven by price, as it had assumed. Instead it was in an artisanal industry, with customers
who wanted collaborations at the earliest stages of development. GE
completely reoriented the way it interacted with the companies in
the industry as a result. In developing markets, ethnographic research also can be very useful, especially in far-flung rural areas,
given that marketers often do not know these consumers as well.18
The American Airlines researchers might meander around firstclass lounges to hear how travelers talk about the different carriers
and their features or sit next to passengers on planes. They can fly on
competitors’ planes to observe in-flight service.

Focus Group Research A focus group is a gathering of 6 to 10
people carefully selected by researchers based on certain

Ethnographic research with female
baby boomers helped Bank of
America launch its well-received
“Keep the Change” program.

102

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

demographic, psychographic, or other considerations and brought together to discuss various
topics of interest at length. Participants are normally paid a small sum for attending. A professional
research moderator provides questions and probes based on the marketing managers’ discussion
guide or agenda. In focus groups, moderators try to discern consumers’ real motivations and why
they say and do certain things. They typically record the sessions, and marketing managers often
remain behind two-way mirrors in the next room. To allow for more in-depth discussion with
participants, focus groups are trending smaller in size.19
Focus-group research is a useful exploratory step, but researchers must avoid generalizing from
focus-group participants to the whole market, because the sample size is too small and the sample is
not drawn randomly. Some marketers feel the research setting is too contrived and prefer to seek other
means of collecting information that they believe are less artificial. “Marketing Memo: Conducting
Informative Focus Groups” has some practical tips to improve the quality of focus groups.
In the American Airlines research, the moderator might start with a broad question, such as,
“How do you feel about first-class air travel?” Questions then move to how people view the different airlines, different existing services, different proposed services, and specifically, Internet service.

marketing

Memo

Conducting Informative Focus Groups

Focus groups allow marketers to observe how and why consumers accept
or reject concepts, ideas, or any specific notion. The key to using focus
groups successfully is to listen and observe. Marketers should eliminate
their own biases as much as possible. Although many useful insights can
emerge from thoughtfully run focus groups, questions can arise about their
validity, especially in today’s complex marketing environment.
There are many challenges to conducting a good focus group. Some researchers believe consumers have been so bombarded with ads, they unconsciously (or perhaps cynically) parrot back what they’ve already heard instead of what they really think. There’s always a concern that participants
are just trying to maintain their self-image and public persona or have a
need to identify with the other members of the group. Participants also may
not be willing to acknowledge in public—or may not even recognize—their
behavior patterns and motivations. And the “loudmouth” or “know-it-all”
problem often crops up when one highly opinionated person drowns out the
rest of the group. Getting the right participants is crucial, but it may be expensive to recruit qualified subjects who meet the sampling criteria ($3,000
to $5,000 per group).
Even when marketers use multiple focus groups, it may be difficult to
generalize the results to a broader population. For example, within the
United States, focus-group findings often vary from region to region. One
firm specializing in focus-group research claimed the best city to conduct
groups was Minneapolis, because there it could get a sample of fairly welleducated people who were honest and forthcoming with their opinions.
Many marketers interpret focus groups in New York and other northeastern
cities carefully, because the people in these areas tend to be highly critical
and generally don’t report that they like much.
Participants must feel as relaxed as possible and strongly motivated
to be truthful. Physical surroundings can be crucial to achieving the right
atmosphere. At one agency an executive noted, “We wondered why

people always seemed grumpy and negative—people were resistant to
any idea we showed them.” Finally in one session a fight broke out between participants. The problem was the room itself: cramped, stifling,
forbidding. “It was a cross between a hospital room and a police interrogation room.” To fix the problem, the agency gave the room a makeover.
Other firms are adapting the look of the room to fit the theme of the
topic—such as designing the room to look like a playroom when speaking to children.
To allow for more interactivity among focus group members, some researchers are incorporating pre-session homework assignments such as diaries, photography, and videography. An area of increasing interest is online
focus groups. These may cost less than a fourth of a traditional, in-person
focus group. Online focus groups also offer the advantages of being less intrusive, allowing geographically diverse subjects to participate, and yielding
fast results. They are useful at collecting reactions to focused topics such as
a specific new product concept.
Proponents of traditional focus groups, on the other hand, maintain that
in-person focus groups allow marketers to be immersed in the research
process, get a close-up look to people’s emotional and physical reactions,
and ensure that sensitive materials are not leaked. Marketers can also
make spontaneous adjustments to the flow of discussion and delve
deeply into more complex topics, such as alternative creative concepts for
a new ad campaign.
Regardless of the particular form it takes, the beauty of a focus
group, as one marketing executive noted, is that “it’s still the most costeffective, quickest, dirtiest way to get information in rapid time on an
idea.” In analyzing the pros and cons, Wharton’s Americus Reed might
have said it best: “A focus group is like a chain saw. If you know
what you’re doing, it’s very useful and effective. If you don’t, you could
lose a limb.”

Sources: Naomi R. Henderson, “Beyond Top of Mind,” Marketing Research (September 1, 2005); Rebecca Harris, “Do Focus Groups Have a Future?” Marketing, June 6, 2005,
p. 17; Linda Tischler, “Every Move You Make,” Fast Company, April 2004, pp. 73–75; Alison Stein Wellner, “The New Science of Focus Groups,” American Demographics, March
2003, pp. 29–33; Dennis Rook, “Out-of-Focus Groups,” Marketing Research 15, no. 2 (Summer 2003), p. 11; Dennis W. Rook, “Loss of Vision: Focus Groups Fail to Connect
Theory, Current Practice,” Marketing News, September 15, 2003, p. 40; Sarah Jeffrey Kasner, “Fistfights and Feng Shui,” Boston Globe, July 21, 2001; Piet Levy, “In With the Old,
In Spite of the New,” Marketing News, May 30, 2009, p. 19.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

| CHAPTER 4

103

Survey Research Companies undertake surveys to assess people’s knowledge, beliefs,
preferences, and satisfaction and to measure these magnitudes in the general population. A
company such as American Airlines might prepare its own survey instrument to gather the
information it needs, or it might add questions to an omnibus survey that carries the questions of
several companies, at a much lower cost. It can also pose the questions to an ongoing consumer
panel run by itself or another company. It may do a mall intercept study by having researchers
approach people in a shopping mall and ask them questions.
As we’ll discuss in more detail later in this chapter, many marketers are taking their surveys
online where they can easily develop, administer, and collect e-mail and Web-based questionnaires.
However they conduct their surveys—online, by phone, or in person—companies must feel the
information they’re getting from the mounds of data makes it all worthwhile. San Francisco–based
Wells Fargo bank collects more than 50,000 customer surveys each month through its bank
branches. It has used customers’ comments to begin more stringent new wait-time standards
designed to improve customer satisfaction.
Of course, by putting out so many surveys each month, companies may run the risk of creating
“survey burnout” and seeing response rates plummet. Keeping a survey short and simple and contacting customers no more than once a month are two keys to drawing people into the data collection effort. Offering incentives is another way companies get consumers to respond. Both Gap and
Jack in the Box offer coupons for discount merchandise or the chance to win a cash prize.20

BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH Customers leave traces of their purchasing behavior in store
scanning data, catalog purchases, and customer databases. Marketers can learn much by analyzing
these data. Actual purchases reflect consumers’ preferences and often are more reliable than
statements they offer to market researchers. For example, grocery shopping data show that highincome people don’t necessarily buy the more expensive brands, contrary to what they might state in
interviews; and many low-income people buy some expensive brands. And as Chapter 3 described,
there is a wealth of online data to collect from consumers. Clearly, American Airlines can learn many
useful things about its passengers by analyzing ticket purchase records and online behavior.
EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH The most scientifically valid research is experimental
research, designed to capture cause-and-effect relationships by eliminating competing
explanations of the observed findings. If the experiment is well designed and executed, research
and marketing managers can have confidence in the conclusions. Experiments call for selecting
matched groups of subjects, subjecting them to different treatments, controlling extraneous
variables, and checking whether observed response differences are statistically significant. If we
An important marketing research
tool is focus groups.

104

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

can eliminate or control extraneous factors, we can relate the observed effects to the variations in
the treatments or stimuli.
American Airlines might introduce in-flight Internet service on one of its regular flights from
Chicago to Tokyo and charge $25 one week and $15 the next week. If the plane carried approximately the same number of first-class passengers each week and the particular weeks made no difference, the airline could relate any significant difference in the number of passengers using the
service to the different prices charged.

RESEARCH INSTRUMENTS Marketing researchers have a choice of three main research
instruments in collecting primary data: questionnaires, qualitative measures, and technological devices.

Questionnaires A questionnaire consists of a set of questions presented to respondents. Because of
its flexibility, it is by far the most common instrument used to collect primary data. Researchers need
to carefully develop, test, and debug questionnaires before administering them on a large scale. The
form, wording, and sequence of the questions can all influence the responses. Closed-end questions
specify all the possible answers and provide answers that are easier to interpret and tabulate. Open-end
questions allow respondents to answer in their own words and often reveal more about how people
think. They are especially useful in exploratory research, where the researcher is looking for insight into
how people think rather than measuring how many people think a certain way.
Table 4.1 provides
examples of both types of questions; also see “Marketing Memo: Questionnaire Dos and Don’ts.”
Qualitative Measures Some marketers prefer more qualitative methods for gauging consumer
opinion, because consumer actions don’t always match their answers to survey questions. Qualitative
research techniques are relatively unstructured measurement approaches that permit a range of
possible responses. Their variety is limited only by the creativity of the marketing researcher.
Because of the freedom it affords both researchers in their probes and consumers in their
responses, qualitative research can often be an especially useful first step in exploring consumers’
brand and product perceptions. It is indirect in nature, so consumers may be less guarded and
reveal more about themselves in the process.
Qualitative research does have its drawbacks. Marketers must temper the in-depth insights that
emerge with the fact that the samples are often very small and may not necessarily generalize to
broader populations. And different researchers examining the same qualitative results may draw
very different conclusions.

marketing

Memo

Questionnaire Dos and Don’ts

1. Ensure that questions are without bias. Don’t lead the respondent
into an answer.

8. Avoid hypothetical questions. It’s difficult to answer questions about
imaginary situations. Answers aren’t necessarily reliable.

2. Make the questions as simple as possible. Questions that include
multiple ideas or two questions in one will confuse respondents.

9. Do not use words that could be misheard. This is especially important
when administering the interview over the telephone. “What is your
opinion of sects?” could yield interesting but not necessarily relevant
answers.

3. Make the questions specific. Sometimes it’s advisable to add memory
cues. For example, be specific with time periods.
4. Avoid jargon or shorthand. Avoid trade jargon, acronyms, and initials not
in everyday use.
5. Steer clear of sophisticated or uncommon words. Use only words in
common speech.
6. Avoid ambiguous words. Words such as “usually” or “frequently” have
no specific meaning.
7. Avoid questions with a negative in them. It is better to say, “Do you
ever . . . ?” than “Do you never . . . ?”

10. Desensitize questions by using response bands. To ask people their age
or ask companies about employee turnover rates, offer a range of response bands instead of precise numbers.
11. Ensure that fixed responses do not overlap. Categories used in fixedresponse questions should be distinct and not overlap.
12. Allow for the answer “other” in fixed-response questions. Precoded
answers should always allow for a response other than those listed.

Source: Adapted from Paul Hague and Peter Jackson, Market Research: A Guide to Planning, Methodology, and Evaluation (London: Kogan Page, 1999). See also, Hans Baumgartner
and Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, “Response Styles in Marketing Research: A Cross-National Investigation,” Journal of Marketing Research (May 2001), pp. 143–56.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

TABLE 4.1

| CHAPTER 4

105

Types of Questions

Name

Description

Example

Dichotomous

A question with two possible answers

In arranging this trip, did you personally phone American?
Yes
No

Multiple choice

A question with three or more answers

With whom are you traveling on this flight?
n No one
n Children only
n Spouse
n Business associates/friends/relatives
n Spouse and children
n An organized tour group

Likert scale

A statement with which the respondent
shows the amount of agreement/
disagreement

Small airlines generally give better service than large ones.
Strongly
Disagree
Neither
Agree
Strongly
disagree
agree nor
agree
disagree
2_____
3_____
4_____
5_____
1_____

Semantic differential

A scale connecting two bipolar words.
The respondent selects the point that
represents his or her opinion.

American Airlines
Large _________________________________ Small
Experienced _____________________________ Inexperienced
Modern _________________________________ Old-fashioned

Importance scale

A scale that rates the importance of
some attribute

Airline in-flight service to me is
Extremely
Very
Somewhat
important
important
important
2_____
3_____
1_____

Not very
important
4_____

Not at all
important
5_____

A scale that rates some attribute from
“poor” to “excellent”

American in-flight service is
Excellent
Very Good
Good
2_____
3_____
1_____

Fair
4_____

Poor
5_____

Intention-to-buy
scale

A scale that describes the respondent’s
intention to buy

If an in-flight telephone were available on a long flight, I would
Definitely
Probably
Not sure
Probably
Definitely
buy
buy
not buy
not buy
2_____
3_____
4_____
5_____
1_____

B. Open-End Questions
Completely
unstructured

A question that respondents can answer
in an almost unlimited number of ways

What is your opinion of American Airlines?

Words are presented, one at a time, and
respondents mention the first word that
comes to mind.

What is the first word that comes to your mind when you hear the
following?
Airline_______________________________________
American_____________________________________

A. Closed-End Questions

Rating scale

Word association

Travel_______________________________________
Sentence completion

An incomplete sentence is presented and
respondents complete the sentence.

When I choose an airline, the most important consideration in
my decision is _________________________________ .

Story completion

An incomplete story is presented, and
respondents are asked to complete it.

“I flew American a few days ago. I noticed that the exterior and
interior of the plane had very bright colors. This aroused in me
the following thoughts and feelings . . . .” Now complete the story.

Picture

A picture of two characters is presented,
with one making a statement. Respondents
are asked to identify with the other and fill
in the empty balloon.

Thematic
Apperception
Test (TAT)

A picture is presented and respondents are
asked to make up a story about what they think
is happening or may happen in the picture.

106

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Nevertheless, there is increasing interest in using qualitative methods. “Marketing Insight:
Getting into the Heads of Consumers” describes the pioneering ZMET approach. Some other
popular qualitative research approaches to get inside consumers’ minds and find out what they
think or feel about brands and products include:21
1.

2.

3.

Word associations—Ask subjects what words come to mind when they hear the brand’s name.
“What does the Timex name mean to you? Tell me what comes to mind when you think of
Timex watches.” The primary purpose of free-association tasks is to identify the range of possible brand associations in consumers’ minds.
Projective techniques—Give people an incomplete stimulus and ask them to complete it, or
give them an ambiguous stimulus and ask them to make sense of it. One approach is “bubble
exercises” in which empty bubbles, like those found in cartoons, appear in scenes of people
buying or using certain products or services. Subjects fill in the bubble, indicating what they
believe is happening or being said. Another technique is comparison tasks in which people
compare brands to people, countries, animals, activities, fabrics, occupations, cars, magazines,
vegetables, nationalities, or even other brands.
Visualization—Visualization requires people to create a collage from magazine photos or
drawings to depict their perceptions.

Marketing Insight
Getting into the Heads
of Consumers
Harvard Business School marketing professor Gerald Zaltman, with
some of his research colleagues, has developed an in-depth methodology to uncover what consumers truly think and feel about products,
services, brands, and other things. The basic assumption behind the
Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique (ZMET) is that most thoughts
and feelings are unconscious and shaped by a set of “deep metaphors.”
Deep metaphors are basic frames or orientations that consumers have
toward the world around them. Largely unconscious and universal, they
recast everything someone thinks, hears, says, or does. According to
Zaltman, there are seven main metaphors:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Balance: justice equilibrium and the interplay of elements;
Transformation: changes in substance and circumstance;
Journey: the meeting of past, present, and future;
Container: inclusion, exclusion, and other boundaries;
Connection: the need to relate to oneself and others;
Resource: acquisitions and their consequences; and
Control: sense of mastery, vulnerability, and well-being

The ZMET technique works by first asking participants in advance
to select a minimum of 12 images from their own sources (magazines,

catalogs, family photo albums) to represent their thoughts and feelings
about the research topic. In a one-on-one interview, the study administrator uses advanced interview techniques to explore the images with
the participant and reveal hidden meanings. Finally, the participants use
a computer program to create a collage with these images that communicates their subconscious thoughts and feelings about the topic. The
results often profoundly influence marketing actions, as the following
three examples illustrate:
•
In a ZMET study about pantyhose for marketers at DuPont, some
respondents’ pictures showed fence posts encased in plastic wrap
or steel bands strangling trees, suggesting that pantyhose are tight
and inconvenient. But another picture showed tall flowers in a
vase, suggesting that the product made a woman feel thin, tall, and
sexy. The “love-hate” relationship in these and other pictures suggested a more complicated product relationship than the DuPont
marketers had assumed.
•
A ZMET study of Nestlé Crunch revealed that—besides the obvious associations to a small indulgence in a busy world, a
source of quick energy, and something that just tasted good—
the candy bar was also seen as a powerful reminder of pleasant
childhood memories.
•
When Motorola conducted a ZMET study of a proposed new security system, study participants selected images of what they felt
when they were secure. The Motorola researchers were struck by
how many images of dogs showed up, suggesting that it might be
appropriate to position the product as a companion.
Sources: Gerald Zaltman and Lindsay Zaltman, Marketing Metaphoria: What Deep
Metaphors Reveal About the Minds of Consumers (Boston: Harvard Business
School Press, 2008); Daniel H. Pink, “Metaphor Marketing,” Fast Company,
March/April 1998, pp. 214–29; Brad Wieners, “Getting Inside—Way Inside—Your
Customer’s Head,” Business 2.0, April 2003, pp. 54–55; Glenn L. Christensen and
Jerry C. Olson, “Mapping Consumers’ Mental Models with ZMET,” Psychology &
Marketing 19, no. 6 (June 2002), pp. 477–502; Emily Eakin, “Penetrating the Mind
by Metaphor,” New York Times, February 23, 2002.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

4.

5.

| CHAPTER 4

107

Brand personification—Ask subjects what kind of person they think of when the brand is
mentioned: “If the brand were to come alive as a person, what would it be like, what would it
do, where would it live, what would it wear, who would it talk to if it went to a party (and what
would it talk about)?” For example, the John Deere brand might make someone think of a
rugged Midwestern male who is hardworking and trustworthy. The brand personality delivers
a picture of the more human qualities of the brand.
Laddering—A series of increasingly more specific “why” questions can reveal consumer motivation and consumers’ deeper, more abstract goals. Ask why someone wants to buy a Nokia
cell phone. “They look well built” (attribute). “Why is it important that the phone be well
built?” “It suggests Nokia is reliable” (a functional benefit). “Why is reliability important?”
“Because my colleagues or family can be sure to reach me” (an emotional benefit). “Why must
you be available to them at all times?” “I can help them if they’re in trouble” (brand essence).
The brand makes this person feel like a Good Samaritan, ready to help others.

Marketers don’t necessarily have to choose between qualitative and quantitative measures, however, and many marketers use both approaches, recognizing that their pros and cons can offset
each other. For example, companies can recruit someone from an online panel to participate in an
in-home use test in which the subject is sent a product and told to capture his or her reactions and
intentions with both a video diary and an online survey.22

Technological Devices There has been much interest in recent years in various technological
devices. Galvanometers can measure the interest or emotions aroused by exposure to a specific ad
or picture. The tachistoscope flashes an ad to a subject with an exposure interval that may range
from less than one hundredth of a second to several seconds. After each exposure, the respondent
describes everything he or she recalls. Eye cameras study respondents’ eye movements to see where
their eyes land first, how long they linger on a given item, and so on.
Technology has now advanced to such a degree that marketers can use devices such as skin sensors, brain wave scanners, and full body scanners to get consumer responses.23 Some researchers
study eye movements and brain activity of Web surfers to see which ads grab their attention.24
“Marketing Insight: Understanding Brain Science” provides a glimpse into some new marketing
research frontiers studying the brain.
Technology has replaced the diaries that participants in media surveys used to keep.
Audiometers attached to television sets in participating homes now record when the set is on and
to which channel it is tuned. Electronic devices can record the number of radio programs a person
is exposed to during the day, or, using Global Positioning System (GPS) technology, how many billboards a person may walk or drive by during a day.

SAMPLING PLAN After deciding on the research approach and instruments, the marketing
researcher must design a sampling plan. This calls for three decisions:
1. Sampling unit: Whom should we survey? In the American Airlines survey, should the sampling
unit consist only of first-class business travelers, first-class vacation travelers, or both? Should it include travelers under age 18? Both traveler and spouse? Once they have determined the sampling
unit, marketers must develop a sampling frame so everyone in the target population has an equal
or known chance of being sampled.
2. Sample size: How many people should we survey? Large samples give more reliable results, but it’s
not necessary to sample the entire target population to achieve reliable results. Samples of less than 1 percent of a population can often provide good reliability, with a credible sampling procedure.
3. Sampling procedure: How should we choose the respondents?
Probability sampling allows marketers to calculate confidence limits for sampling error and makes the sample more representative.
Thus, after choosing the sample, marketers could conclude that
“the interval five to seven trips per year has 95 chances in 100 of
containing the true number of trips taken annually by first-class
passengers flying between Chicago and Tokyo.”

CONTACT METHODS Now the marketing researcher must
decide how to contact the subjects: by mail, by telephone, in person,
or online.

Using sophisticated equipment and
methods, neuroscience researchers
are studying how brain activity is
affected by consumer marketing.

108

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Marketing Insight
Understanding Brain Science
As an alternative to traditional consumer research, some researchers
have begun to develop sophisticated techniques from neuroscience that
monitor brain activity to better gauge consumer responses to marketing.
The term neuromarketing describes brain research on the effect of marketing stimuli. Firms with names such as NeuroFocus and EmSense are
using EEG (electroencephalograph) technology to correlate brand activity with physiological cues such as skin temperature or eye movement
and thus gauge how people react to ads.
Researchers studying the brain have found different results from
conventional research methods. One group of researchers at UCLA
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure how
consumers’ brains responded to 2006’s Super Bowl advertisements.
They found that the ads for which subjects displayed the highest brain
activity were different from the ads with the highest stated preferences.
Other research found little effect from product placement unless the
products in question played an integral role in the storyline.
One major research finding to emerge from neurological consumer research is that many purchase decisions appear to be characterized less by the logical weighing of variables and more “as a largely
unconscious habitual process, as distinct from the rational, conscious,
information-processing model of economists and traditional marketing
textbooks.” Even basic decisions, such as the purchase of gasoline,
seem to be influenced by brain activity at the subrational level.
Neurological research has been used to measure the type of emotional response consumers exhibit when presented with marketing stimuli. A group of researchers in England used an EEG to monitor cognitive
functions related to memory recall and attentiveness for 12 different

regions of the brain as subjects were exposed to advertising. Brain wave
activity in different regions indicated different emotional responses. For
example, heightened activity in the left prefrontal cortex is characteristic
of an “approach” response to an ad and indicates an attraction to the
stimulus. In contrast, a spike in brain activity in the right prefrontal cortex is indicative of a strong revulsion to the stimulus. In yet another part
of the brain, the degree of memory formation activity correlates with
purchase intent. Other research has shown that people activate different regions of the brain in assessing the personality traits of people than
they do when assessing brands.
By adding neurological techniques to their research arsenal, marketers are trying to move toward a more complete picture of what goes
on inside consumers’ heads. Although it may be able to offer different insights from conventional techniques, neurological research at this point
is very costly, running as much as $100,000 or even more per project.
Given the complexity of the human brain, however, many researchers
caution that neurological research should not form the sole basis for
marketing decisions. These research activities have not been universally
accepted. The measurement devices to capture brain activity can
be highly obtrusive, such as with skull caps studded with electrodes,
creating artificial exposure conditions. Others question whether they offer
unambiguous implications for marketing strategy. Brian Knutson, a professor of neuroscience and psychology at Stanford University, compares
the use of EEG to “standing outside a baseball stadium and listening to
the crowd to figure out what happened.” Other critics worry that if the
methods do become successful, they will only lead to more marketing
manipulation by companies. Despite all this controversy, marketers’ endless pursuit of deeper insights about consumers’ response to marketing
virtually guarantees continued interest in neuromarketing.
Sources: Carolyn Yoon, Angela H. Gutchess, Fred Feinberg, and Thad A. Polk,
“A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of Neural Dissociations between
Brand and Person Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research 33 (June 2006),
pp. 31–40; Daryl Travis, “Tap Buyers’ Emotions for Marketing Success,” Marketing
News, February 1, 2006, pp. 21–22; Deborah L. Vence, “Pick Someone’s Brain,”
Marketing News, May 1, 2006, pp. 11–13; Martin Lindstrom, Buyology: Truth and
Lies About Why We Buy (New York: Doubleday, 2008); Tom Abate, “Coming to a
Marketer Near You: Brain Scanning,” San Francisco Chronicle, May 19, 2008; Brian
Sternberg, “How Couch Potatoes Watch TV Could Hold Clues for Advertisers,”
Boston Globe, September 6, 2009, pp. G1, G3.

Mail Contacts The mail questionnaire is one way to reach people who would not give personal
interviews or whose responses might be biased or distorted by the interviewers. Mail questionnaires
require simple and clearly worded questions. Unfortunately, the response rate is usually low or slow.
Telephone Contacts Telephone interviewing is a good method for gathering information
quickly; the interviewer is also able to clarify questions if respondents do not understand them.
Interviews must be brief and not too personal. Although the response rate has typically been higher
than for mailed questionnaires, telephone interviewing in the United States is getting more difficult
because of consumers’ growing antipathy toward telemarketers.
In late 2003, Congress passed legislation allowing the Federal Trade Commission to restrict telemarketing calls through its “Do Not Call” registry. By mid-2010, consumers had registered over
200 million phone numbers. Marketing research firms are exempt from the ruling, but given the
increasingly widespread resistance to telemarketing, it undoubtedly reduces the effectiveness of
telephone surveys as a marketing research method in the United States.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

| CHAPTER 4

109

In other parts of the world, such restrictive legislation does not
exist. Because mobile phone penetration in Africa has risen from just
1 in 50 people in 2000 to almost one-third of the population in 2008,
cell phones in Africa are used to convene focus groups in rural areas
and to interact via text messages.25

Personal Contacts Personal interviewing is the most versatile
method. The interviewer can ask more questions and record
additional observations about the respondent, such as dress and body
language. At the same time, however, personal interviewing is the
most expensive method, is subject to interviewer bias, and requires
more administrative planning and supervision. Personal interviewing
takes two forms. In arranged interviews, marketers contact
respondents for an appointment and often offer a small payment or
incentive. In intercept interviews, researchers stop people at a
shopping mall or busy street corner and request an interview on the
spot. Intercept interviews must be quick, and they run the risk of including nonprobability samples.

Local Motors

Online Contacts An approach of increasing importance, the Internet offers many ways to do
research. A company can embed a questionnaire on its Web site and offer an incentive to answer it,
or it can place a banner on a frequently visited site such as Yahoo!, inviting people to answer some
questions and possibly win a prize. Online product testing, in which companies float trial balloons
for new products, is also growing and providing information much faster than traditional newproduct marketing research techniques. Here is how one small business is using the Internet to
conduct research on new-product development.

Local Motors

The Web site of Local Motors of Wareham, Massachusetts, a
small-scale automaker, lets anyone upload design ideas. The site occasionally hosts competitions for cash prizes of up to $10,000 in which registered members—who include trained
design engineers and transportation experts—vote on the designs they like best, or other
decisions related to building the autos and running the company. The winning ideas are then
incorporated in the cars Local Motors builds. Members remain involved after the competitions, offering
criticism and suggestions throughout the cars’ development. Local Motors has been diligent about building its car design community by marketing the site on other sites that attract design enthusiasts and experts. To make sure outside contributors do not seek compensation if their ideas are adopted, Local
Motors requires members of its online community to sign a lengthy legal agreement.26
Marketers can also host a real-time consumer panel or virtual focus group or sponsor a chat
room, bulletin board, or blog and introduce questions from time to time. They can ask customers
to brainstorm or have followers of the company on Twitter rate an idea. Online communities and
networks of customers serve as a resource for a wide variety of companies. Insights from Kraftsponsored online communities helped the company develop its popular line of 100-calorie
snacks.27 Here are two other examples.
•

Del Monte tapped into its 400-member, handpicked online community called “I Love My Dog”
when it was considering a new breakfast treat for dogs. The consensus request was for something
with a bacon-and-egg taste and an extra dose of vitamins and minerals. Continuing to work with
the online community throughout the product development, the company introduced fortified
“Snausage Breakfast Bites” in half the time usually required to launch a new product.28

•

InterContinental Hotel Groups uses both surveys and communities to gather data on customer satisfaction. Online surveys provide actionable and speedy results to correct customer
service issues; the online community provides a sounding board for more in-depth, longerterm research objectives.29

Online research was estimated to make up 33 percent of all survey-based research in 2006,
and Internet-based questionnaires also accounted for nearly one-third of U.S. spending on market

In parts of the developing world
such as Africa, the widespread
penetration of cell phones allows
them to be used to conduct
marketing research.

110

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

research surveys in the same year.30 There are many other means to use the Internet as a research
tool. The company can learn about individuals who visit its site by tracking how they clickstream
through the Web site and move to other sites. It can post different prices, use different headlines,
and offer different product features on different Web sites or at different times to learn the relative
effectiveness of its offerings.
Yet, as popular as online research methods are, smart companies are choosing to use them to
augment rather than replace more traditional methods. At Kraft Foods, online research is a supplement to traditional research, said Seth Diamond, director of consumer insights and strategy.
“Online is not a solution in and of itself to all of our business challenges,” he said, “but it does
expand our toolkit.”31
There are a number of pros and cons to online research.32 Here are some advantages:
•
•

•

•

Online research is inexpensive. A typical e-mail survey can cost between 20 percent and
50 percent less than what a conventional survey costs, and return rates can be as high as 50 percent.
Online research is fast. Online surveys are fast because the survey can automatically direct
respondents to applicable questions and transmit results immediately. One estimate says an
online survey can generate 75 percent to 80 percent of the targeted response in 48 hours,
compared to a telephone survey that can require 70 days to obtain 150 interviews.
People tend to be honest and thoughtful online. People may be more open about their opinions when they can respond privately and not to another person whom they feel might be
judging them, especially on sensitive topics (such as, “how often do you bathe or shower?”).
Because they choose when and where they take the survey and how much time to devote to
each question, they may be more relaxed, introspective, and candid.
Online research is versatile. Increased broadband penetration offers online research even
more flexibility and capabilities. For instance, virtual reality software lets visitors inspect 3-D
models of products such as cameras, cars, and medical equipment and manipulate product
characteristics. Even at the basic tactile level, online surveys can make answering a questionnaire easier and more fun than paper-and-pencil versions. Online community blogs allow customer participants to interact with each other.

Some disadvantages include:
•

•

•

Samples can be small and skewed. Some 40 percent of households were without broadband
Internet access in the United States in 2009; the percentage is even higher among lowerincome groups, in rural areas, and in most parts of Asia, Latin America, and Central and
Eastern Europe, where socioeconomic and education levels also differ.33 Although it’s certain
that more and more people will go online, online market researchers must find creative ways
to reach population segments on the other side of the “digital divide.” One option is to combine offline sources with online findings. Providing temporary Internet access at locations
such as malls and recreation centers is another strategy. Some research firms use statistical
models to fill in the gaps in market research left by offline consumer segments.
Online panels and communities can suffer from excessive turnover. Members may become
bored with the company’s efforts and flee. Or perhaps even worse, they may stay but only halfheartedly participate. Panel and community organizers are taking steps to address the quality
of the panel and the data they provide by raising recruiting standards, downplaying incentives,
and carefully monitoring participation and engagement levels. New features, events, and other
activities must be constantly added to keep members interested and engaged.34
Online market research can suffer from technological problems and inconsistencies. Problems
can arise with online surveys because browser software varies. The Web designer’s final product may look very different on the research subject’s screen.

Online researchers have also begun to use text messaging in various ways—to conduct a chat
with a respondent, to probe more deeply with a member of an online focus group, or to direct
respondents to a Web site.35 Text messaging is also a useful way to get teenagers to open up on topics.

Step 3: Collect the Information
The data collection phase of marketing research is generally the most expensive and the most prone
to error. Marketers may conduct surveys in homes, over the phone, via the Internet, or at a central
interviewing location like a shopping mall. Four major problems arise in surveys. Some respondents

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

Leica
Surveying and
Engineering

will be away from home or otherwise inaccessible and must be contacted again or replaced. Other
respondents will refuse to cooperate. Still others will give biased or dishonest answers. Finally, some
interviewers will be biased or dishonest.
Internationally, one of the biggest obstacles to collecting information is the need to achieve consistency.36 Latin American respondents may be uncomfortable with the impersonal nature of the
Internet and need interactive elements in a survey so they feel they’re talking to a real person.
Respondents in Asia, on the other hand, may feel more pressure to conform and may therefore not
be as forthcoming in focus groups as online. Sometimes the solution may be as simple as ensuring
the right language is used.

Leica Surveying and Engineering

When Leica Surveying
and Engineering, a global provider of high-end surveying and measurement equipment,
sought to gather competitive intelligence in its industry, it initially deployed surveys only in
English, because the company’s business was typically conducted in English, even across
several different European countries. However, the response rate was dismal, even though the
sample comprised individuals who had an affinity with the company. Closer review showed that the incountry sales representatives conducted business in their native languages. Consequently, the company
redeployed its survey in various languages, such as Spanish and German, and the response rate doubled
almost overnight.37

Step 4: Analyze the Information
The next-to-last step in the process is to extract findings by tabulating the data and developing
summary measures. The researchers now compute averages and measures of dispersion for the major variables and apply some advanced statistical techniques and decision models in the hope of
discovering additional findings. They may test different hypotheses and theories, applying sensitivity analysis to test assumptions and the strength of the conclusions.

Step 5: Present the Findings
As the last step, the researcher presents findings relevant to the major marketing decisions facing
management. Researchers increasingly are being asked to play a more proactive, consulting role
in translating data and information into insights and recommendations.38 They’re also considering ways to present research findings in as understandable and compelling a fashion as possible.
“Marketing Insight: Bringing Marketing Research to Life with Personas” describes an approach
that some researchers are using to maximize the impact of their consumer research findings.
The main survey findings for the American Airlines case showed that:
1.

2.

3.

Passengers’ chief reason for using in-flight Internet service would be to stay connected and
receive and send e-mails. Some would also pass the time surfing the Web. This entertainment
capability would require expensive broadband Internet access, but passengers stated they
would be able to charge the cost and their companies would pay.
At $25, about 5 out of 10 first-class passengers would use Internet service during a flight; about
6 would use it at $15. Thus, a fee of $15 would produce less revenue ($90 ⫽ 6 ⫻ $15) than
$25 ($125 ⫽ 5 ⫻ $25). Assuming the same flight takes place 365 days a year, American could
collect $45,625 (⫽ $125 ⫻ 365) annually. Given an investment of $90,000, it would take two
years to break even.
Offering in-flight Internet service would strengthen the public’s image of American Airlines as
an innovative and progressive airline. American would gain some new passengers and customer goodwill.

Step 6: Make the Decision
The American Airlines managers who commissioned the research need to weigh the evidence. If
their confidence in the findings is low, they may decide against introducing the in-flight Internet
service. If they are predisposed to launching the service, the findings support their inclination.

| CHAPTER 4

111

112

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Unilever’s biggest and most successful hair-care launch, for
Sunsilk, was aided by insights into the target consumer the
company dubbed “Katie.” The Katie persona outlined the
twenty-something female’s hair-care needs, but also her perceptions and attitudes and the way she dealt with her everyday
life “dramas.”
Although personas provide vivid information to aid marketing decision
making, marketers also have to be careful to not overgeneralize. Any
target market may have a range of consumers who vary along a number of key dimensions. To accommodate these potential differences,
researchers sometimes employ two to six personas. Best Buy used
multiple personas to help redesign and relaunch GeekSquad.com, the
online site of its fast-growing national computer-support service.
Using quantitative, qualitative, and observational research, the firm
developed five online customer personas to guide its Web redesign
efforts:
•

Marketing Insight
Bringing Marketing Research
to Life with Personas
To bring all the information and insights they have gained about their
target market to life, some researchers are employing personas.
Personas are detailed profiles of one, or perhaps a few, hypothetical
target market consumers, imagined in terms of demographic, psychographic, geographic, or other descriptive attitudinal or behavioral information. Researchers may use photos, images, names, or short bios to
help convey the particulars of the persona.
The rationale behind personas is to provide exemplars or archetypes of how the target customer looks, acts, and feels that are as
true-to-life as possible, to ensure marketers within the organization
fully understand and appreciate their target market and therefore incorporate a target-customer point of view in all their marketing decision making. Consider some applications:
•

•

Chrysler designed rooms for two fictional characters—28-year-old
single male Roberto Moore and 30-year-old pharmaceutical rep
Jenny Sieverson—and decorated them to reflect the personality,
lifestyles, and brand choices of these key targets for the Dodge
Caliber and Jeep Compass.
Specialty tool and equipment maker Campbell Hausfeld relied on the
many retailers it supplied, including Home Depot and Lowe’s, to help
it keep in touch with consumers. After developing eight consumer
profiles, including a female do-it-yourselfer and an elderly consumer,
the firm was able to successfully launch new products such as drills
that weighed less or that included a level for picture hanging.

•

•
•
•
•

“Jill”—a suburban mom who uses technology and her computer
daily and depends on the Geek Squad as an outsourced service
akin to a landscape or plumber.
“Charlie”—a 50-plus male who is curious about and interested in
technology but needs an unintimidating guide.
“Daryl”—a technologically savvy hands-on experimenter who
occasionally needs a helping hand with his tech projects.
“Luis”—a time-pressed small-business owner whose primary goal
is to complete tasks as expediently as possible.
“Nick”—a prospective Geek Squad agent who views the site critically and needs to be challenged.

To satisfy Charlie, a prominent 911 button was added to the upper
right-hand corner in case a crisis arose, but to satisfy Nick, Best Buy
created a whole channel devoted to geek information.
Sources: Dale Buss, “Reflections of Reality,” Point (June 2006), pp. 10–11; Todd
Wasserman, “Unilever, Whirlpool Get Personal with Personas,” Brandweek,
September 18, 2006, p. 13; Daniel B. Honigman, “Persona-fication,” Marketing
News, April 1, 2008, p. 8. Rick Roth, “Take Back Control of the Purchase,”
Advertising Age, September 3, 2007, p. 13. Lisa Sanders, “Major Marketers Get
Wise to the Power of Assigning Personas,” Advertising Age, April 9, 2007, p. 36.

They may even decide to study the issues further and do more research. The decision is theirs, but
rigorously done research provides them with insight into the problem (see
Table 4.2).39
Some organizations use marketing decision support systems to help their marketing managers
make better decisions. MIT’s John Little defines a marketing decision support system (MDSS) as
a coordinated collection of data, systems, tools, and techniques, with supporting software and
hardware, by which an organization gathers and interprets relevant information from business and
environment and turns it into a basis for marketing action.40 Once a year, Marketing News lists
hundreds of current marketing and sales software programs that assist in designing marketing research studies, segmenting markets, setting prices and advertising budgets, analyzing media, and
planning sales force activity.41

Overcoming Barriers to the Use of Marketing Research
In spite of the rapid growth of marketing research, many companies still fail to use it sufficiently or
correctly.42 They may not understand what all marketing research is capable of and not provide the

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

| CHAPTER 4

113

To better understand what people
thought of Cheetos snacks, researchers dressed up as the brand’s
Chester Cheetah character and
interacted with consumers in
the street.

TABLE 4.2

The Seven Characteristics of Good Marketing Research

1. Scientific method

Effective marketing research uses the principles of the scientific method: careful observation, formulation of
hypotheses, prediction, and testing.

2. Research creativity

In an award-winning research study to reposition Cheetos snacks, researchers dressed up in a brand mascot
Chester Cheetah suit and walked around the streets of San Francisco. The response the character encountered
led to the realization that even adults loved the fun and playfulness of Cheetos. The resulting repositioning led to
a double-digit sales increase despite a tough business environment.43

3. Multiple methods

Marketing researchers shy away from overreliance on any one method. They also recognize the value of using
two or three methods to increase confidence in the results.

4. Interdependence of
models and data
5. Value and cost of
information

Marketing researchers recognize that data are interpreted from underlying models that guide the type of
information sought.
Marketing researchers show concern for estimating the value of information against its cost. Costs are typically
easy to determine, but the value of research is harder to quantify. It depends on the reliability and validity of the
findings and management’s willingness to accept and act on those findings.

6. Healthy skepticism

Marketing researchers show a healthy skepticism toward glib assumptions made by managers about how a
market works. They are alert to the problems caused by “marketing myths.”

7. Ethical marketing

Marketing research benefits both the sponsoring company and its customers. The misuse of marketing research
can harm or annoy consumers, increasing resentment at what consumers regard as an invasion of their privacy
or a disguised sales pitch.

researcher the right problem definition and information from which to work. They may also have
unrealistic expectations about what researchers can offer. Failure to use marketing research properly has led to numerous gaffes, including the following historic one.

Star Wars In the 1970s, a successful marketing research executive left General
Foods to try a daring gambit: bringing market research to Hollywood, to give film studios access
to the same research that had spurred General Foods’s success. A major film studio handed him
a science fiction film proposal and asked him to research and predict its success or failure. His
views would inform the studio’s decision about whether to back the film. The research executive
concluded the film would fail. For one, he argued, Watergate had made the United States less trusting of institutions and, as a result, its citizens in the 1970s prized realism and authenticity over science fiction. This
particular film also had the word “war” in its title; he reasoned that viewers, suffering from post-Vietnam
hangover, would stay away in droves. The film was Star Wars, which eventually grossed over $4.3 billion in
box office receipts alone. What this researcher delivered was information, not insight. He failed to study the

114

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

script itself, to see that it was a fundamentally human story—of love, conflict, loss, and redemption—that happened to play out against the backdrop
of space.44

Measuring Marketing
Productivity

Improperly conducted and interpreted consumer research almost
killed Star Wars, one of the most
successful film franchises of
all time.

Marketers are facing increased pressure to provide clear, quantifiable evidence to senior management as to how their marketing expenditures help the firm to achieve its goals and financial objectives. Although we can easily quantify marketing expenses and
investments as inputs in the short run, the resulting outputs such
as broader brand awareness, enhanced brand image, greater customer loyalty, and improved new product prospects may take
months or even years to manifest themselves. Moreover, a whole
host of internal changes within the organization and external
changes in the marketing environment may coincide with the marketing expenditures, making it hard to isolate the effects of any
particular marketing activity.45
Nevertheless, an important task of marketing research is to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of marketing activities. In one
survey, 65 percent of marketers indicated that return on marketing investment was a concern.46 A recent survey of the nation’s
leading technology Chief Marketing Officers revealed that over
80 percent of the companies surveyed expressed dissatisfaction
with their ability to benchmark their marketing program’s
business impact and value.47
Marketing research can help address this increased need for
accountability. Two complementary approaches to measuring
marketing productivity are: (1) marketing metrics to assess marketing effects and (2) marketing-mix modeling to estimate causal
relationships and measure how marketing activity affects outcomes. Marketing dashboards are a
structured way to disseminate the insights gleaned from these two approaches within the
organization.

Marketing Metrics
Marketers employ a wide variety of measures to assess marketing effects.48 Marketing metrics is
the set of measures that helps them quantify, compare, and interpret their marketing performance.
Here is how two marketing executives look at marketing metrics to better understand marketing
ROI at their companies: 49
•

•

The CMO of Mary Kay , Rhonda Shasteen, focuses on four long-term brand strength metrics—
market awareness, consideration, trial, and 12-month beauty consultant productivity—as well
as a number of short-term program-specific metrics like ad impressions, Web site traffic, and
purchase conversion.
The Virgin America VP of marketing, Porter Gale, looks at a broad set of online metrics—cost
per acquisition, cost per click, and cost per thousand page impressions (CPM). She also looks
at total dollars driven by natural and paid search and online display advertising as well as
tracking results and other metrics from the offline world.

There are many different marketing measures; marketers choose one or more based on the particular issue they face or the problem they must solve. An advocate of simple, relevant metrics, the
University of Virginia’s Paul Farris draws an analogy to the way a Boeing 747 jet pilot decides what
information to use from the vast array of instruments in the cockpit to fly the plane:50

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

Aircraft pilots have protocols. When they are sitting on the tarmac warming their engines
waiting to take off, they are looking at certain things. When they are taxiing, they look at
others. When they are in flight, they look at still others. There is a sequence of knowing
when to pay attention to which metrics, which lets them have their cake and eat it too, in
terms of the simplicity and complexity trade-off.
London Business School’s Tim Ambler suggests that if firms think they are already measuring
marketing performance adequately, they should ask themselves five questions:51
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Do you routinely research consumer behavior (retention, acquisition, usage) and why consumers behave that way (awareness, satisfaction, perceived quality)?
Do you routinely report the results of this research to the board in a format integrated with
financial marketing metrics?
In those reports, do you compare the results with the levels previously forecasted in the business plans?
Do you also compare them with the levels achieved by your key competitor using the same
indicators?
Do you adjust short-term performance according to the change in your marketing-based asset(s)?

Ambler says firms must give priority to measuring and reporting marketing performance
through marketing metrics. He believes they can split evaluation into two parts: (1) short-term results and (2) changes in brand equity. Short-term results often reflect profit-and-loss concerns as
shown by sales turnover, shareholder value, or some combination of the two. Brand-equity measures could include customer awareness, attitudes, and behaviors; market share; relative price premium; number of complaints; distribution and availability; total number of customers; perceived
quality, and loyalty and retention.52
Companies can also monitor an extensive set of internal metrics, such as innovation. For example, 3M tracks the proportion of sales resulting from its recent innovations. Ambler also recommends developing employee measures and metrics, arguing that “end users are the ultimate
customers, but your own staff are your first; you need to measure the health of the internal market.”
Table 4.3 summarizes a list of popular internal and external marketing metrics from Ambler’s
survey in the United Kingdom.53
Carefully measuring the effects of a marketing activity or program helps ensure managers
make the right decisions going forward. Seeking greater engagement with younger consumers,
Servus Credit Union in Alberta, Canada, launched its “Young & Free Alberta” program featuring a
competition to find a youth spokesperson for Alberta. To connect with young Albertans, Kelsey
MacDonald, the 2010 winner, works with Servus to create daily blogs, post entertaining and
educational videos at YoungFreeAlberta.com, and maintain a Facebook and Twitter presence.

TABLE 4.3

Sample Marketing Metrics

I. External

II. Internal

Awareness

Awareness of goals

Market share (volume or value)

Commitment to goals

Relative price (market share value/volume)

Active innovation support

Number of complaints (level of dissatisfaction)

Resource adequacy

Consumer satisfaction

Staffing/skill levels

Distribution/availability

Desire to learn

Total number of customers

Willingness to change

Perceived quality/esteem

Freedom to fail

Loyalty/retention

Autonomy

Relative perceived quality

Relative employee satisfaction

Source: Tim Ambler, “What Does Marketing Success Look Like?” Marketing Management (Spring 2001), pp. 13–18. Reprinted with permission
from Marketing Management, published by the American Marketing Association.

| CHAPTER 4

115

116

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Kelsey also attends events throughout Alberta where she interacts with the 17- to 25-year-old
crowd in order to better understand their financial needs. Research validated the campaign’s
success, with more than 107 million impressions to the program generated through various
forms of media and thousands of new accounts opened.54

Marketing-Mix Modeling
Marketing accountability also means that marketers must more precisely estimate the effects
of different marketing investments. Marketing-mix models analyze data from a variety of
sources, such as retailer scanner data, company shipment data, pricing, media, and promotion spending data, to understand more precisely the effects of specific marketing activities.55
To deepen understanding, marketers can conduct multivariate analyses, such as regression
analysis, to sort through how each marketing element influences marketing outcomes such as
brand sales or market share.56
Especially popular with packaged-goods marketers such as Procter & Gamble, Clorox, and
Colgate, the findings from marketing-mix modeling help allocate or reallocate expenditures.
Analyses explore which part of ad budgets are wasted, what optimal spending levels are, and
what minimum investment levels should be.57
Although marketing-mix modeling helps to isolate effects, it is less effective at assessing how
different marketing elements work in combination. Wharton’s Dave Reibstein also notes three
other shortcomings:58
•

Canada’s Servus Credit Union
used research to validate the
effects of the spokesperson for
its Young & Free Alberta
Spokester program. Kelsey
MacDonald, shown here, was
the 2010 contest winner.

•

Marketing-mix modeling focuses on incremental growth instead of baseline sales or longterm effects.
•
The integration of important metrics such as customer satisfaction, awareness, and brand
equity into marketing-mix modeling is limited.
Marketing-mix modeling generally fails to incorporate metrics related to competitors, the
trade, or the sales force (the average business spends far more on the sales force and trade promotion than on advertising or consumer promotion).

Marketing Dashboards
Firms are also employing organizational processes and systems to make sure they maximize
the value of all these different metrics. Management can assemble a summary set of relevant
internal and external measures in a marketing dashboard for synthesis and interpretation.
Marketing dashboards are like the instrument panel in a car or plane, visually displaying realtime indicators to ensure proper functioning. They are only as good as the information on
which they’re based, but sophisticated visualization tools are helping bring data alive to improve understanding and analysis.59
Some companies are also appointing marketing controllers to review budget items and
expenses. Increasingly, these controllers are using business intelligence software to create
digital versions of marketing dashboards that aggregate data from disparate internal and
external sources.
As input to the marketing dashboard, companies should include two key market-based scorecards that reflect performance and provide possible early warning signals.
•

•

A customer-performance scorecard records how well the company is doing year after year on
such customer-based measures as those shown in
Table 4.4. Management should set target
goals for each measure and take action when results get out of bounds.
A stakeholder-performance scorecard tracks the satisfaction of various constituencies who
have a critical interest in and impact on the company’s performance: employees, suppliers,
banks, distributors, retailers, and stockholders. Again, management should take action when
one or more groups register increased or above-norm levels of dissatisfaction.60

Some executives worry that they’ll miss the big picture if they focus too much on a set of numbers on a dashboard. Some critics are concerned about privacy and the pressure the technique
places on employees. But most experts feel the rewards offset the risks.61 “Marketing Insight:
Marketing Dashboards to Improve Effectiveness and Efficiency” provides practical advice about the
development of these marketing tools.

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

TABLE 4.4
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

| CHAPTER 4

117

Sample Customer-Performance Scorecard Measures

Percentage of new customers to average number of customers
Percentage of lost customers to average number of customers
Percentage of win-back customers to average number of customers
Percentage of customers falling into very dissatisfied, dissatisfied, neutral, satisfied, and very
satisfied categories
Percentage of customers who say they would repurchase the product
Percentage of customers who say they would recommend the product to others
Percentage of target market customers who have brand awareness or recall
Percentage of customers who say that the company’s product is the most preferred in its category
Percentage of customers who correctly identify the brand’s intended positioning and differentiation
Average perception of company’s product quality relative to chief competitor
Average perception of company’s service quality relative to chief competitor

capital development. According to LaPointe, an effective dashboard will
focus thinking, improve internal communications, and reveal where
marketing investments are paying off and where they aren’t.
LaPointe observes four common measurement “pathways” marketers are pursuing today (see
Figure 4.2).

Marketing Insight

•

Marketing Dashboards to Improve
Effectiveness and Efficiency

•

Marketing consultant Pat LaPointe sees marketing dashboards as
providing all the up-to-the-minute information necessary to run the
business operations for a company—such as sales versus forecast,
distribution channel effectiveness, brand equity evolution, and human

The customer metrics pathway looks at how prospects become
customers, from awareness to preference to trial to repeat purchase, or some less linear model. This area also examines how the
customer experience contributes to the perception of value and
competitive advantage.
The unit metrics pathway reflects what marketers know about
sales of product/service units—how much is sold by product line
and/or by geography; the marketing cost per unit sold as an efficiency yardstick; and where and how margin is optimized in terms
of characteristics of the product line or distribution channel.

|Fig. 4.2|

Technically Sound but Ad-hoc Efforts
Across Multiple Measurement Silos

Marketing
Measurement Pathway

Customer
Metrics

Unit
Metrics

Cash-Flow
Metrics

Brand
Metrics

Hierarchy of
Effects

Product/Category
Sales

Program and
Campaign ROI

Brand Imagery
& Attributes

Satisfaction/
Experience

Marketing
Cost per Unit

Media Mix
Models

Equity
Drivers

Attitude/Behavior
Segment Migration

Margin
Optimization

Initiative Portfolio
Optimization

Financial
Valuation

100s of Reports
but Very Little
Knowledge
Integration or
Learning Synthesis

(continued)

118

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

|Fig. 4.3|

Example of a
Marketing Dashboard
Source: Adapted from Patrick LaPointe, Marketing
by the Dashboard Light—How to Get More Insight,
Foresight, and Accountability from Your Marketing
Investments. © 2005, Patrick LaPointe.

•

•

The cash-flow metrics pathway focuses on how well marketing expenditures are achieving short-term returns. Program and campaign ROI models measure the immediate impact or net present
value of profits expected from a given investment.
The brand metrics pathway tracks the development of the longerterm impact of marketing through brand equity measures that
assess both the perceptual health of the brand from customer and
prospective customer perspectives as well as the overall financial
health of the brand.

LaPointe feels a marketing dashboard can present insights from all
the pathways in a graphically related view that helps management see
subtle links between them. A well-constructed dashboard can have a

series of tabs that allow the user to toggle easily between different
“families” of metrics organized by customer, product, experience, brand,
channels, efficiency, organizational development, or macroenvironmental
factors. Each tab presents the three or four most insightful metrics, with
data filtered by business unit, geography, or customer segment based on
the users’ needs. (See Figure
4.3 for a sample brand metrics page.)
Ideally, the number of metrics presented in the marketing dashboard would be reduced to a handful of key drivers over time. Meanwhile,
the process of developing and refining the marketing dashboard will undoubtedly raise and resolve many key questions about the business.
Source: Adapted from Pat LaPointe, Marketing by the Dashboard Light,
Association of National Advertisers, 2005, www.MarketingNPV.com.

Summary
1. Companies can conduct their own marketing research or
hire other companies to do it for them. Good marketing research is characterized by the scientific method, creativity,
multiple research methods, accurate model building, costbenefit analysis, healthy skepticism, and an ethical focus.
2. The marketing research process consists of defining the
problem, decision alternatives; and research objectives;
developing the research plan; collecting the information;
analyzing the information; presenting the findings to
management; and making the decision.

3. In conducting research, firms must decide whether to
collect their own data or use data that already
exist. They must also choose a research approach
(observational, focus group, survey, behavioral data, or
experimental) and research instruments (questionnaire,
qualitative measures, or technological devices). In
addition, they must decide on a sampling plan and
contact methods (by mail, by phone, in person, or
online).

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

4. Two complementary approaches to measuring marketing productivity are: (1) marketing metrics to assess
marketing effects and (2) marketing-mix modeling to estimate causal relationships and measure how marketing

| CHAPTER 4

119

activity affects outcomes. Marketing dashboards are a
structured way to disseminate the insights gleaned from
these two approaches within the organization.

Applications
Marketing Debate
What Is the Best Type of Marketing
Research?
Many market researchers have their favorite research
approaches or techniques, although different researchers
often have different preferences. Some researchers maintain that the only way to really learn about consumers or
brands is through in-depth, qualitative research. Others
contend that the only legitimate and defensible form of marketing research uses quantitative measures.
Take a position: The best marketing research is quantitative in nature versus The best marketing research is
qualitative in nature.

Marketing Excellence

>>IDEO
IDEO is the largest design consultancy firm in
the United States. The
company has created
some of the most
recognizable design
icons of the technology age, including
the first laptop computer, the first mouse
(for Apple), the Palm
V PDA, and the
TiVo digital video
recorder. Beyond
its high-tech wizardry, the company
has designed household
items such as the Swiffer Sweeper and the Crest Neat
Squeeze toothpaste tube, both for Procter & Gamble.
IDEO’s diverse roster of clients includes AT&T, Bank of
America, Ford Motor Company, PepsiCo, Nike, Marriott,
Caterpillar, Eli Lilly, Lufthansa, Prada, and the Mayo Clinic.
IDEO’s success is predicated on an approach called
“design thinking” based on a “human-centered methodology.” The company strives to design products that

Marketing Discussion
Survey Quality
When was the last time you participated in a survey? How
helpful do you think the information you provided was? How
could the research have been done differently to make it
more effective?

consumers actively want because they offer a superior
experience and solve a problem. In order to achieve these
consumer-friendly solutions, IDEO tries to uncover deep
insights through a variety of human-centered research
methods. These studies help the firm better understand
how consumers purchase, interact with, use, and even
dispose of products. This customer-focused approach
has run counter to the prevailing wisdom of many hightech firms that focus more on their own capabilities when
designing products. David Blakely, head of IDEO’s technology group, explained, “Tech companies design from
the inside out, whereas we design from the outside in so
that we can put customers first.”
IDEO employs a number of other observational methods to conduct “deep dives” into consumer behavior. The
company’s “human factors” team shadows consumers,
takes pictures or videos of them during product purchase or
use occasions, and conducts in-depth interviews with them
to further evaluate their experiences. Another method
is called “behavioral mapping,” which creates a photographic log of people within a certain area like an airline
departure lounge, a hospital waiting room, or a food court
at a shopping mall over a period of days to gauge how the
experience can be improved. A third method relies on
“camera journals” that participants keep, in which they
record their visual impressions of a given product or category.
IDEO also invites consumers to use “storytelling” techniques
to share personal narratives, videos, skits, or even animations about their experiences with a product or service.

120

PART 2

CAPTURING MARKETING INSIGHTS

Prototyping has also contributed to IDEO’s success. It
takes place throughout the design process so individuals
can test out, experience, and improve upon each level of
development. IDEO encourages its clients, even senior executives, to participate in the research so they get a sense
of the actual consumer experience with their product or
service. AT&T executives, for example, were sent on
a scavenger hunt designed to test the company’s location
software for its mMode mobile phones. The executives
soon realized the software was not user-friendly. One
resorted to calling his wife so she could use Google to help
him find an item on the list. IDEO helped AT&T redesign
the interface to be more intuitive for the average user.
IDEO helped apparel-maker Warnaco improve sales
by having its designers shadow eight women as they
shopped for lingerie. The “shop-alongs” revealed that
most consumers had a negative buying experience. They
had difficulty locating the lingerie section in the department
store and finding the right size in the overcrowded display,
and they felt the fitting rooms were too small. IDEO developed a new six-stage merchandising environment that included larger fitting rooms, “concierges” to give shoppers
information, and improved displays. Warnaco implemented this plan with the help of the department stores.
In another example, Marriott hired IDEO to help make
its Courtyard by Marriott hotels more appealing to younger
guests. IDEO conducted interviews and observed guests in
the hotel’s lounges, lobbies, and restaurants. Its research
revealed that younger guests were turned off by the lack of
activity in the hotel’s public places, the lack of technology
offered, and the poor food options. As a result, Courtyard
by Marriott changed its furniture and decor to be more

Marketing Excellence

>>Intuit
Intuit develops and sells
financial and tax solution
software for consumers
and small to mediumsized businesses. The
company was founded in
1983 by a former Procter
& Gamble employee,
Scott Cook, and a Stanford University programmer, Tom Proulx, after
Cook realized there

warm, comfortable, and inviting. The hotel added advanced technology options throughout its lobbies and
lounges, such as flat-screen TVs and free Wi-Fi. Marriott
converted the breakfast buffets to 24/7 coffee-shop-style
cafés, where guests can quickly grab a gourmet coffee
drink and healthy bite to eat any time. And Courtyard created new outdoor hangout spots with sound speakers and
fire pits. After the renovations, Courtyard by Marriott
changed its tagline to “Courtyard. It’s a New Stay.”
IDEO’s novel consumer-led approach to design has led
to countless success stories and awards for its clients and
for the firm itself. The most important result for IDEO’s designs is that they solve a usability problem for clients. The
company goes “broad and deep” to achieve this goal. Since
its founding, it has been issued over 1,000 patents, and in
2008 the company generated $120 million in revenues.
Questions
1. Why has IDEO been so successful? What is the most
difficult challenge it faces in conducting its research
and designing its products?
2. In the end, IDEO creates great solutions for companies
that then receive all the credit. Should IDEO try to create more brand awareness for itself? Why or why not?
Sources: Lisa Chamberlain, “Going off the Beaten Path for New Design Ideas,” New York Times,
March 12, 2006; Chris Taylor, “School of Bright Ideas,” Time, March 6, 2005, p. A8; Scott
Morrison, “Sharp Focus Gives Design Group the Edge,” Financial Times, February 17, 2005, p. 8;
Bruce Nussbaum, “The Power of Design,” BusinessWeek, May 17, 2004, p. 86; Teressa Iezzi,
“Innovate, But Do It for Consumers,” Advertising Age, September 11, 2006; Barbara De Lollis,
“Marriott Perks Up Courtyard with Edgier, More Social Style,” USA Today, April 1, 2008; Tim
Brown, “Change by Design,” BusinessWeek, October 5, 2009, pp. 54–56.

must be a better way to automate his bill-paying process. For
over 25 years, Intuit’s mission has been to “revolutionize people’s lives by solving their important business and financial
management problems.”
Intuit launched its first product, Quicken, in 1984 and
struggled to survive during those first years. After some
favorable reviews in the trade journals and an effective
print advertising campaign, the company got its first
break. By 1988, Quicken was the best-selling finance
product on the market. In 1992, the company launched
QuickBooks, a bookkeeping and payroll software product
for small businesses, and went public the following year.
Intuit grew quickly in the early 1990s, thanks to the
success of Quicken, QuickBooks, and TurboTax, a tax
preparation software program. Intuit’s products did something for small businesses that more complicated

CONDUCTING MARKETING RESEARCH

accounting packages didn’t: they solved finance and
tax problems in a simple, easy-to-use manner. Intuit had
recognized correctly that simplicity was the key, not indepth accounting analysis. By 1995, the firm held a
70 percent market share, and Microsoft tried to purchase
it for $2 billion. However, the Justice Department blocked
the deal as anticompetitive and the buyout collapsed.
From 1995 to 1997, Intuit’s stock tumbled 72 percent
and forced the company to refocus its strategic efforts. It
turned to the growing power of the Internet, online banking capabilities, and valuable input from its customers to
develop new product versions, which in turn improved the
company’s stock value and market position throughout
the 2000s.
Intuit spends a significant amount of time and
money—approximately 20 percent of net revenues—on
consumer research each year. It is critical for Intuit to know
exactly how customers use and feel about their products
due to the fast-paced nature of technology, shifting consumer needs, and the competitiveness of its industry. Intuit
conducts several levels of research and invites consumers
and businesses to participate in a variety of ways.
During a Site Visit, Intuit researchers visit the individual’s home or office to observe and learn exactly how its
products are used and can be improved in the true work
environment. A Lab Study invites consumers to one of
Intuit’s U.S. research labs to test out new products and
ideas. During a Remote Study, consumers are interviewed
over the phone and often asked to view new design concepts over the Internet. The company also conducts an
ongoing extensive research study with the Institute for the
Future, to learn more about the future trends affecting
small businesses. Intuit uses what it learns not only to produce improved versions of its products each year, but also
to better understand the next generation of financial and
tax software, such as solutions for mobile devices.
Demand for Intuit’s products is seasonal, and its marketing efforts are typically concentrated around tax preparation time—November through April. During that time, Intuit
develops promotions with original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and major retailers. It promotes its products
through a number of marketing efforts including direct mail,
Web marketing, print, radio, and television ads.
While Intuit’s marketing campaigns have evolved over
the years, it was clear early on that positive word of mouth
and exceptional customer service are its most effective
marketing tools. Harry Pforzheimer, chief communications
officer and marketing leader, explained, “It’s a little harder
to measure but when you know that roughly eight out of

| CHAPTER 4

121

10 customers bought your product because of word-ofmouth that’s a pretty powerful tool . . . So engaging with
our customers directly is part of our DNA and communicating with customers on a timely basis is critical. And
that timely basis now is instantaneous.”
Recently, Intuit has increased its presence on social
media Web sites such as Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn.
Just 12 weeks after the firm integrated a small-business
Web site with these social networks, sales of QuickBooks
increased 57 percent. To measure the viral success of this
site, Intuit identified bloggers who either wrote their own
stories or picked up stories originally posted by a few influential bloggers who were given a special preview. Intuit
classified each blog post according to velocity (whether it
took a month or happened in a few days), share of voice
(how much talk occurred in the blogosphere), voice quality
(what was said and how positive or negative it was), and
sentiment (how meaningful the comments were).
In 2008, Intuit earned $3.1 billion in revenue, primarily
from Quicken, QuickBooks, and TurboTax sales. The
company now employs over 8,000 people, mostly in the
United States, and is planning to expand internationally.
It continues to acquire companies, such as personal
finance Web site Mint.com in 2009, that will help it in
growth areas such as solutions for mobile devices. Intuit
believes that expanding its mobile solutions will encourage younger consumers to turn to the company for their
finance and tax software. Growth will also come from
previous Microsoft Money customers. In 2009, Microsoft
announced it would discontinue its Money product line
after an 18-year battle with Quicken. The victory was a
rare win against the software giant and one that should
provide great opportunity for Intuit.
Questions
1. Elaborate on Intuit’s use of customer research. Why
did it work so well for the company?
2. Could anything go wrong for Intuit now that it has
beaten out Microsoft? Why or why not?
3. How should Intuit gauge the results of its research
among younger consumers with mobile devices?
Sources: Intuit, 2008 Annual Report; Karen E. Klein, “The Face of Entrepreneurship in 2017,”
BusinessWeek, January 31, 2007; Intuit, “Intuit Study: Next-Gen Artisans Fuel New Entrepreneurial
Economy,” February 13, 2008; Michael Bush, “How PR Chiefs Have Shifted Toward Center of
Marketing Departments,” Advertising Age, September 21, 2009; Jon Swartz, “More Marketers Use
Social Networking to Reach Customers,” USA Today, August 28, 2009; Mark Johnson and Joe
Sinfield, “Focusing on Consumer Needs Is Not Enough,” Advertising Age, April 28, 2008; “Intuit CEO
Sees Growth in Mobile, Global Markets,” Associated Press, September 23, 2009.

PART 3 Connecting with Customers
Chapter 5 | Creating Long-term Loyalty Relationships
Chapter 6 | Analyzing Consumer Markets
Chapter 7 | Analyzing Business Markets
Chapter 8 | Identifying Market Segments
and Targets

ter
p
a
Ch

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What are customer value,
satisfaction, and loyalty, and
how can companies deliver
them?
2. What is the lifetime value
of customers, and how can
marketers maximize it?
3. How can companies attract and
retain the right customers and
cultivate strong customer
relationships?
4. What are the pros and cons of
database marketing?
Harrah’s Total Rewards loyalty program has
significantly increased customer value to
the firm.

122

5

Creating Long-term
Loyalty Relationships
Today, companies face their toughest competition ever. Moving from a
product-and-sales philosophy to a holistic marketing philosophy, however, gives them a
better chance of outperforming the competition. The cornerstone of a well-conceived holistic
marketing orientation is strong customer relationships. Marketers must connect with
customers—informing, engaging, and maybe even energizing them in the process. Customercentered companies are adept at building customer relationships, not just products; they are
skilled in market engineering, not just product engineering. A pioneer in customer relationship
management techniques is Harrah’s Entertainment.

In 1997, Harrah’s Entertainment, in Las Vegas, launched a pioneering loyalty program that
pulled all customer data into a centralized warehouse and provided sophisticated analysis
to better understand the value of the investments the casino made in its customers.
Harrah’s has over 10 million active members in its Total Rewards loyalty program, a system it has fine-tuned to achieve near-real-time analysis: As customers interact with slot
machines, check into casinos, or buy meals, they receive reward offers—food vouchers or gambling
credits, for example—based on the predictive analyses. The company has now identified hundreds of
highly specific customer segments, and by targeting offers to each of them, it can almost double its
share of customers’ gaming budgets and generate $6.4 billion annually (80 percent of its gaming
revenue). Harrah’s dramatically cut back its traditional ad spending, largely replacing it with direct mail
and e-mail—a good customer may receive as many as 150 pieces in a year. Data from the Total
Rewards program even influenced Harrah’s decision to buy Caesars
Entertainment, when company research revealed that most of Harrah’s As Harrah’s experience shows, successful marketers
customers who visited Las Vegas without staying at a Harrah’s-owned are those who carefully manage their customer base. In this
hotel were going to Caesars Palace. Harrah’s latest loyalty innovation is a chapter, we spell out in detail the ways they can go about winning
mobile marketing program that sends time-based and location-based customers and beating competitors. The answer lies largely in
doing a better job of meeting or exceeding customer expectations.
offers to customers’ mobile devices in real time.1

Building Customer Value,
Satisfaction, and Loyalty
Creating loyal customers is at the heart of every business.2 As marketing experts Don Peppers and
Martha Rogers say:3
The only value your company will ever create is the value that comes from customers—
the ones you have now and the ones you will have in the future. Businesses succeed by getting, keeping, and growing customers. Customers are the only reason you build factories,
hire employees, schedule meetings, lay fiber-optic lines, or engage in any business activity.
Without customers, you don’t have a business.
123

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

|Fig. 5.1|

(b) Modern Customer-Oriented Organization Chart

Top
management

Middle management

CUSTOMERS

Frontline people

C

Traditional
Organization versus
Modern CustomerOriented Company
Organization

(a) Traditional Organization Chart

S

PART 3

T

M

S

E

U

R

124

O

Middle management

O

Frontline people

U

R
S

C

E

S

T

M

CUSTOMERS

Top
management

Managers who believe the customer is the company’s only true “profit center” consider the traditional organization chart in
Figure 5.1(a)—a pyramid with the president at the top, management in the middle, and frontline people and customers at the bottom—obsolete.4
Successful marketing companies invert the chart as in Figure 5.1(b). At the top are customers;
next in importance are frontline people who meet, serve, and satisfy customers; under them are the
middle managers, whose job is to support the frontline people so they can serve customers well;
and at the base is top management, whose job is to hire and support good middle managers. We
have added customers along the sides of Figure 5.1(b) to indicate that managers at
every level must be personally involved in knowing, meeting, and serving customers.
Some companies have been founded with the customer-on-top business model,
and customer advocacy has been their strategy—and competitive advantage—all
along. With the rise of digital technologies such as the Internet, increasingly informed consumers today expect companies to do more than connect with them,
more than satisfy them, and even more than delight them. They expect companies to
listen and respond to them.5
When Office Depot added customer reviews to its Web site in 2008, revenue and
sales conversion increased significantly. The company also incorporated reviewrelated terms to its paid search advertising campaign. As a result of these efforts, Web
site revenue and the number of new buyers visiting the site both increased by more
than 150 percent.6

Customer Perceived Value
Consumers are better educated and informed than ever, and they have the tools to
verify companies’ claims and seek out superior alternatives.7

Dell Dell rode to success by offering low-priced computers, logistical effi-

When certain business decisions
led to a deterioration of customer
service, Dell’s founder Michael
Dell took decisive action.

ciency, and after-sales service. The firm’s maniacal focus on low costs has been
a key ingredient in its success. When the company shifted its customer-service
call centers to India and the Philippines to cut costs, however, understaffing
frequently led to 30-minute waits for customers. Almost half the calls required at
least one transfer. To discourage customer calls, Dell even removed its toll-free service number from its Web site. With customer satisfaction slipping, and competitors matching its product quality and prices and offering improved service, Dell’s market share and stock price both declined
sharply. Dell ended up hiring more North American call center employees. “The team was managing cost instead of managing service and quality,” Michael Dell confesses.8

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

How then do customers ultimately make choices? They tend to be value maximizers,
within the bounds of search costs and limited knowledge, mobility, and income. Customers estimate
which offer they believe—for whatever reason—will deliver the most perceived value and act on it
(
Figure 5.2). Whether the offer lives up to expectation affects customer satisfaction and the
probability that the customer will purchase the product again. In one 2008 survey asking U.S. consumers “Does [Brand X] give good value for what you pay?” the highest scoring brands included
Craftsman tools, Discovery Channel, History Channel, Google, and Rubbermaid.9
Customer-perceived value (CPV) is the difference between the prospective customer’s evaluation of
all the benefits and all the costs of an offering and the perceived alternatives. Total customer benefit is
the perceived monetary value of the bundle of economic, functional, and psychological benefits customers expect from a given market offering because of the product, service, people, and image. Total
customer cost is the perceived bundle of costs customers expect to incur in evaluating, obtaining, using,
and disposing of the given market offering, including monetary, time, energy, and psychological costs.
Customer-perceived value is thus based on the difference between benefits the customer gets and
costs he or she assumes for different choices. The marketer can increase the value of the customer
offering by raising economic, functional, or emotional benefits and/or reducing one or more costs.
The customer choosing between two value offerings, V1 and V2, will favor V1 if the ratio V1:V2 is
larger than one, favor V2 if the ratio is smaller than one, and be indifferent if the ratio equals one.

APPLYING VALUE CONCEPTS Suppose the buyer for a large construction company wants
to buy a tractor for residential construction from either Caterpillar or Komatsu. He wants the
tractor to deliver certain levels of reliability, durability, performance, and resale value. The
competing salespeople carefully describe their respective offers. The buyer decides Caterpillar has
greater product benefits based on his perceptions of those attributes. He also perceives differences
in the accompanying services—delivery, training, and maintenance—and decides Caterpillar
provides better service as well as more knowledgeable and responsive staff. Finally, he places higher
value on Caterpillar’s corporate image and reputation. He adds up all the economic, functional,
and psychological benefits from these four sources—product, services, personnel, and image—and
perceives Caterpillar as delivering greater customer benefits.
Does he buy the Caterpillar tractor? Not necessarily. He also examines his total cost of transacting
with Caterpillar versus Komatsu, which consists of more than money. As Adam Smith observed over
two centuries ago in The Wealth of Nations,“The real price of anything is the toil and trouble of acquiring it.” Total customer cost also includes the buyer’s time, energy, and psychological costs expended in
product acquisition, usage, maintenance, ownership, and disposal. The buyer evaluates these elements
together with the monetary cost to form a total customer cost. Then he considers whether Caterpillar’s
total customer cost is too high compared to total customer benefits. If it is, he might choose Komatsu.
The buyer will choose whichever source delivers the highest perceived value.
Now let’s use this decision-making theory to help Caterpillar succeed in selling to this buyer.
Caterpillar can improve its offer in three ways. First, it can increase total customer benefit by
improving economic, functional, and psychological benefits of its product, services, people,
and/or image. Second, it can reduce the buyer’s nonmonetary costs by reducing the time, energy,
and psychological investment. Third, it can reduce its product’s monetary cost to the buyer.
Suppose Caterpillar concludes the buyer sees its offer as worth $20,000. Further, suppose
Caterpillar’s cost of producing the tractor is $14,000. This means Caterpillar’s offer generates
$6,000 over its cost, so the firm needs to charge between $14,000 and $20,000. If it charges less than
$14,000, it won’t cover its costs; if it charges more, it will price itself out of the market.
Caterpillar’s price will determine how much value it delivers to the buyer and how much flows
to Caterpillar. If it charges $19,000, it is creating $1,000 of customer perceived value and keeping
$5,000 for itself. The lower Caterpillar sets its price, the higher the customer perceived value and,
therefore, the higher the customer’s incentive to purchase. To win the sale, the firm must offer more
customer perceived value than Komatsu does.10 Caterpillar is well aware of the importance of
taking a broad view of customer value.

Caterpillar Caterpillar has become a leading firm by maximizing total customer
value in the construction-equipment industry, despite challenges from a number of able
competitors such as John Deere, Case, Komatsu, Volvo, and Hitachi. First, Caterpillar
produces high-performance equipment known for reliability and durability—key purchase

| CHAPTER 5

125

Customerperceived
Value

Total
customer
benefit

Total
customer
cost

Product
benefit

Monetary
cost

Services
benefit

Time cost

Personnel
benefit

Energy cost

Image
benefit

Psychological
cost

|Fig. 5.2|

Determinants of
Customer-Perceived
Value

126

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Caterpillar’s market success is
partly a result of how well the firm
creates customer value.

considerations in heavy industrial equipment. The firm also makes it easy
for customers to find the right product by providing a full line of construction equipment and a wide range of financial terms. Caterpillar
maintains the largest number of independent construction-equipment
dealers in the industry. These dealers all carry a complete line of
Caterpillar products and are typically better trained and perform more
reliably than competitors’ dealers. Caterpillar has also built a worldwide
parts and service system second to none in the industry. Customers
recognize all the value Caterpillar creates in its offerings, allowing the
firm to command a premium price 10 percent to 20 percent higher than
competitors. Caterpillar’s biggest challenges are a reenergized Komatsu,
which has made a strong push in China, and some supply chain issues
in introducing new products.11
Very often, managers conduct a customer value analysis to reveal the company’s strengths and
weaknesses relative to those of various competitors. The steps in this analysis are:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Identify the major attributes and benefits customers value. Customers are asked what attributes,
benefits, and performance levels they look for in choosing a product and vendors. Attributes and
benefits should be defined broadly to encompass all the inputs to customers’ decisions.
Assess the quantitative importance of the different attributes and benefits. Customers are
asked to rate the importance of different attributes and benefits. If their ratings diverge too
much, the marketer should cluster them into different segments.
Assess the company’s and competitors’ performances on the different customer values
against their rated importance. Customers describe where they see the company’s and competitors’ performances on each attribute and benefit.
Examine how customers in a specific segment rate the company’s performance against a specific
major competitor on an individual attribute or benefit basis. If the company’s offer exceeds the
competitor’s offer on all important attributes and benefits, the company can charge a higher price
(thereby earning higher profits), or it can charge the same price and gain more market share.
Monitor customer values over time. The company must periodically redo its studies of customer values and competitors’ standings as the economy, technology, and features change.

CHOICE PROCESSES AND IMPLICATIONS Some marketers might argue the process we
have described is too rational. Suppose the customer chooses the Komatsu tractor. How can we
explain this choice? Here are three possibilities.
1.

2.

3.

The buyer might be under orders to buy at the lowest price. The Caterpillar salesperson’s task
is then to convince the buyer’s manager that buying on price alone will result in lower longterm profits and customer value.
The buyer will retire before the company realizes the Komatsu tractor is more expensive to
operate. The buyer will look good in the short run; he is maximizing personal benefit. The
Caterpillar salesperson’s task is to convince other people in the customer company that
Caterpillar delivers greater customer value.
The buyer enjoys a long-term friendship with the Komatsu salesperson. In this case,
Caterpillar’s salesperson needs to show the buyer that the Komatsu tractor will draw complaints
from the tractor operators when they discover its high fuel cost and need for frequent repairs.

The point is clear: Buyers operate under various constraints and occasionally make choices that
give more weight to their personal benefit than to the company’s benefit.
Customer-perceived value is a useful framework that applies to many situations and yields rich
insights. It suggests that the seller must assess the total customer benefit and total customer cost associated with each competitor’s offer in order to know how his or her offer rates in the buyer’s mind. It
also implies that the seller at a disadvantage has two alternatives: increase total customer benefit or
decrease total customer cost. The former calls for strengthening or augmenting the economical, functional, and psychological benefits of the offering’s product, services, personnel, and image. The latter
calls for reducing the buyer’s costs by reducing the price or cost of ownership and maintenance,
simplifying the ordering and delivery process, or absorbing some buyer risk by offering a warranty.12

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

| CHAPTER 5

DELIVERING HIGH CUSTOMER VALUE Consumers have varying degrees of loyalty to
specific brands, stores, and companies. Oliver defines loyalty as “a deeply held commitment to
rebuy or repatronize a preferred product or service in the future despite situational influences and
marketing efforts having the potential to cause switching behavior.”13
Table 5.1 displays brands
with the greatest degree of customer loyalty according to one 2010 survey.14
The value proposition consists of the whole cluster of benefits the company promises to deliver;
it is more than the core positioning of the offering. For example, Volvo’s core positioning has been
“safety,” but the buyer is promised more than just a safe car; other benefits include good performance,
design, and safety for the environment. The value proposition is thus a promise about the experience customers can expect from the company’s market offering and their relationship with the
supplier. Whether the promise is kept depends on the company’s ability to manage its value delivery system.15 The value delivery system includes all the experiences the customer will have on the
way to obtaining and using the offering. At the heart of a good value delivery system is a set of core
business processes that help deliver distinctive consumer value.16

TABLE 5.1

Top 25 Brands in Customer Loyalty

Brand

Category

Rankings
2010

2009

Apple iPhone

Wireless Handset

1

1

Clairol (hair color)

Hair Color

2

NA

Samsung

Wireless Handset

3

2

Mary Kay

Cosmetics (Mass Merchandiser)

4

7

Grey Goose

Vodka

5

6

Clinique (cosmetics: Luxury)

Cosmetics (Luxury)

6

19

AVIS

Car Rental

7

8

Walmart

Retail Store (Discount)

8

5

Google

Search Engine

9

3

Amazon.com

Online Book/Music

10

10

Bing

Search Engine

11

NA

J. Crew

Retail Store (Apparel)

12

23

AT&T Wireless

Wireless Phone

13

123

Discover Card

Credit Card

14

121

Verizon Wireless

Wireless Phone

15

21

Intercontinental Hotels

Hotel (Luxury)

16

103

Cheerios

Breakfast Cereal: Kids

17

71

Dunkin’ Donuts

Coffee

18

54

Home Depot

Retail Store (Home Improvement)

19

192

Domino’s Pizza

Pizza

20

156

Barilla

Pasta Sauce

21

NA

Canon

MFP Copier

22

44

Nike

Athletic Footwear

23

178

Coors Light

Beer (Light)

24

63

Acer

Computer (Netbook)

25

NA

Source: “2010 Brand Keys Customer Loyalty Leaders List,” www.brandkeys.com.

127

128

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Total Customer Satisfaction

Although safety is Volvo’s core
position, the value proposition
the firm offers customers includes
other benefits too.

In general, satisfaction is a person’s feelings of pleasure or disappointment that result from comparing a product’s perceived performance (or outcome) to expectations.17 If the performance falls
short of expectations, the customer is dissatisfied. If it matches expectations, the customer is satisfied. If it exceeds expectations, the
customer is highly satisfied or delighted.18 Customer assessments of
product performance depend on many factors, especially the type of
loyalty relationship the customer has with the brand.19 Consumers
often form more favorable perceptions of a product with a brand
they already feel positive about.
Although the customer-centered firm seeks to create high
customer satisfaction, that is not its ultimate goal. Increasing
customer satisfaction by lowering price or increasing services may
result in lower profits. The company might be able to increase its
profitability by means other than increased satisfaction (for example, by improving manufacturing processes or investing more in
R&D). Also, the company has many stakeholders, including employees, dealers, suppliers, and stockholders. Spending more to increase customer satisfaction might divert funds from increasing
the satisfaction of other “partners.” Ultimately, the company must
try to deliver a high level of customer satisfaction subject to also
delivering acceptable levels to other stakeholders, given its total
resources.20
How do buyers form their expectations? Expectations result from
past buying experience, friends’ and associates’ advice, and marketers’ and competitors’ information and promises. If marketer raise expectations too high, the
buyer is likely to be disappointed. If it sets expectations too low, it won’t attract enough buyers
(although it will satisfy those who do buy).21 Some of today’s most successful companies are raising
expectations and delivering performances to match. Korean automaker Kia found success in the
United States by launching low-cost, high-quality cars with enough reliability to offer 10-year,
100,000 mile warranties.

Monitoring Satisfaction
Many companies are systematically measuring how well they treat customers, identifying the factors shaping satisfaction, and changing operations and marketing as a result.22
Wise firms measure customer satisfaction regularly, because it is one key to customer retention.23 A highly satisfied customer generally stays loyal longer, buys more as the company introduces new and upgraded products, talks favorably to others about the company and its products,
pays less attention to competing brands and is less sensitive to price, offers product or service ideas
to the company, and costs less to serve than new customers because transactions can become routine.24 Greater customer satisfaction has also been linked to higher returns and lower risk in the
stock market.25
The link between customer satisfaction and customer loyalty is not proportional, however.
Suppose customer satisfaction is rated on a scale from one to five. At a very low level of satisfaction
(level one), customers are likely to abandon the company and even bad-mouth it. At levels two to
four, customers are fairly satisfied but still find it easy to switch when a better offer comes along. At
level five, the customer is very likely to repurchase and even spread good word of mouth about the
company. High satisfaction or delight creates an emotional bond with the brand or company, not
just a rational preference. Xerox’s senior management found its “completely satisfied” customers
were six times more likely to repurchase Xerox products over the following 18 months than even its
“very satisfied” customers.26
The company needs to recognize, however, that customers vary in how they define good performance. Good delivery could mean early delivery, on-time delivery, or order completeness, and
two customers can report being “highly satisfied” for different reasons. One may be easily satisfied
most of the time and the other might be hard to please but was pleased on this occasion.27

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

| CHAPTER 5

129

MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES Periodic surveys can track customer satisfaction directly and
ask additional questions to measure repurchase intention and the respondent’s likelihood or
willingness to recommend the company and brand to others. One of the nation’s largest and most
diversified new-home builders, Pulte Homes, wins more awards in J.D. Power’s annual survey than
any other by constantly measuring how well it’s doing with customers and tracking them over a
long period of time. Pulte surveys customers just after they buy their homes and again several years
later to make sure they’re still happy.28 “Marketing Insight: Net Promoter and Customer
Satisfaction” describes why some companies believe just one well-designed question is all that is
necessary to assess customer satisfaction.29
Companies need to monitor their competitors’ performance too. They can monitor their
customer loss rate and contact those who have stopped buying or who have switched to another supplier to find out why. Finally, as described in Chapter 3, companies can hire mystery shoppers to
pose as potential buyers and report on strong and weak points experienced in buying the company’s and competitors’ products. Managers themselves can enter company and competitor sales

Marketing Insight
Net Promoter and Customer
Satisfaction
Many companies make measuring customer satisfaction a top priority,
but how should they go about doing it? Bain’s Frederick Reichheld suggests only one customer question really matters: “How likely is it that
you would recommend this product or service to a friend or colleague?”
According to Reichheld, a customer’s willingness to recommend results
from how well the customer is treated by frontline employees, which
in turn is determined by all the functional areas that contribute to a
customer’s experience.30
Reichheld was inspired in part by the experiences of Enterprise
Rent-A-Car. When the company cut its customer satisfaction survey in
1998 from 18 questions to 2—one about the quality of the rental experience and the other about the likelihood customers would rent from the
company again—it found those who gave the highest ratings to their
rental experience were three times as likely to rent again than those
who gave the second highest rating. The firm also found that diagnostic
information managers collected from dissatisfied customers helped it
fine-tune its operations.
In a typical Net Promoter survey that follows Reichheld’s thinking,
customers are asked to rate their likelihood to recommend on a 0 to
10-point scale. Marketers then subtract detractors (those who gave a
0 to 6) from promoters (those who gave a 9 or 10) to arrive at the Net
Promoter Score (NPS). Customers who rate the brand with a 7 or 8
are deemed passively satisfied and are not included. A typical set of
NPS scores falls in the 10 percent to 30 percent range, but world-class

companies can score over 50 percent. Some firms with top NPS
scores include USAA (89 percent), Apple (77 percent), Amazon.com
(74 percent), Costco.com (73 percent), and Google (71 percent).
Reichheld is gaining believers. GE, American Express, and
Microsoft among others have all adopted the NPS metric, and GE has
tied 20 percent of its managers’ bonuses to its NPS scores. When the
European unit of GE Healthcare scored low, follow-up research
revealed that response times to customers were a major problem. After
it overhauled its call center and put more specialists in the field,
GE Healthcare’s Net Promoter scores jumped 10 to 15 points.
BearingPoint found clients who gave it high Net Promoter scores
showed the highest revenue growth.
Reichheld says he developed NPS in response to overly
complicated—and thus ineffective—customer surveys. So it’s not
surprising that client firms praise its simplicity and strong relationship to financial performance. When Intuit applied Net Promoter to its
TurboTax product, feedback revealed dissatisfaction with the software’s rebate procedure. After Intuit dropped the proof-of-purchase
requirement, sales jumped 6 percent.
Net Promoter is not without critics. One comprehensive academic
study of 21 firms and more than 15,000 consumers in Norway failed to
find any superiority of Net Promoter over other metrics such as the ACSI
measure, discussed later in this chapter.
Sources: Fred Reichheld, Ultimate Question: For Driving Good Profits and True
Growth (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2006); Jena McGregor,
“Would You Recommend Us?” BusinessWeek, January 30, 2006, pp. 94–95;
Kathryn Kranhold, “Client-Satisfaction Tool Takes Root,” Wall Street Journal, July 10,
2006; Fred Reichheld, “The One Number You Need to Grow,” Harvard Business
Review, December 2003; Timothy L. Keiningham, Bruce Cooil, Tor Wallin
Andreassen, and Lerzan Aksoy, “A Longitudinal Examination of Net Promoter and
Firm Revenue Growth,” Journal of Marketing, 71 (July 2007), pp. 39–51; Neil A.
Morgan and Lopo Leotte Rego, “The Value of Different Customer Satisfaction and
Loyalty Metrics in Predicting Business Performance,” Marketing Science, 25, no. 5
(September–October 2006), pp. 426–39; Timothy L. Keiningham, Lerzan Aksoy,
Bruce Cooil, and Tor W. Andreassen, “Linking Customer Loyalty to Growth,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (Summer 2008), pp. 51–57; Timothy L. Keiningham,
Lerzan Aksoy, Bruce Cooil, and Tor W. Andreassen, “Commentary on ‘The Value of
Different Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty Metrics in Predicting Business
Performance,’” Marketing Science, 27, no. 3 (May–June 2008), 531–32.

130

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

PART 3

situations where they are unknown and experience firsthand the treatment they receive, or they can
phone their own company with questions and complaints to see how employees handle the calls.

INFLUENCE OF CUSTOMER SATISFACTION For customer-centered companies,
customer satisfaction is both a goal and a marketing tool. Companies need to be especially
concerned with their customer satisfaction level today because the Internet provides a tool for
consumers to quickly spread both good and bad word of mouth to the rest of the world. Some
customers set up their own Web sites to air grievances and galvanize protest, targeting high-profile
brands such as United Airlines, Home Depot, and Mercedes-Benz.31
The University of Michigan’s Claes Fornell has developed the American Customer Satisfaction
Index (ACSI) to measure consumers’ perceived satisfaction with different firms, industries, economic sectors, and national economies.32
Table 5.2 displays some of the 2009 leaders.
Companies that do achieve high customer satisfaction ratings make sure their target market
knows it. Once they achieved number one status in their category on J.D. Power’s customer satisfaction ratings, Hyundai, American Express, Medicine Shoppe (a chain pharmacy), and Alaska
Airways have communicated that fact.

TABLE 5.2

2009 ACSI Scores by Industry

Industry

Firm

Score

Airlines

Southwest Airlines

81

Apparel

Jones Apparel

84

Automobiles & Light Vehicles

Lexus & BMW

87

Banks

Wachovia

76

Breweries

Molson Coors Brewing

83

Cable & Satellite TV

DIRECTV

71

Cellular Telephones

Nokia

74

Cigarettes

Philip Morris

79

Department & Discount Stores

Nordstrom & Kohl’s

80

Energy Utilities

Sempra Energy

80

Express Delivery

FedEx

84

Fixed Line Telephone Service

Cox Communications

74

Food Manufacturing

H. J. Heinz

89

Health Insurance

Blue Cross and Blue Shield

73

Hotels

Hilton Hotels

79

Internet Brokerage

Fidelity Investments

80

Internet News & Information

MSNBC.com

76

Internet Portals & Search Engines

Google

86

Internet Travel

Expedia

77

Life Insurance

Prudential Financial

79

Personal Care & Cleaning Products

Clorox

87

Personal Computers

Apple

85

Soft Drinks

Dr Pepper Snapple

87

Supermarkets

Publix

82

Wireless Telephone Service

Verizon Wireless

74

Source: ACSI LLC, www.theacsi.org. Used with permission.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS Some companies think they’re getting a sense of customer
satisfaction by tallying complaints, but studies show that while customers are dissatisfied with
their purchases about 25 percent of the time, only about 5 percent complain. The other 95 percent
either feel complaining is not worth the effort or don’t know how or to whom to complain. They
just stop buying.33
Of the customers who register a complaint, 54 percent to 70 percent will do business with the
organization again if their complaint is resolved. The figure goes up to a staggering 95 percent if the
customer feels the complaint was resolved quickly. Customers whose complaints are satisfactorily
resolved tell an average of 5 people about the good treatment they received.34 The average dissatisfied customer, however, gripes to 11 people. If each of these tells still other people, the number
exposed to bad word of mouth may grow exponentially.
No matter how perfectly designed and implemented a marketing program is, mistakes will happen. The best thing a company can do is make it easy for customers to complain. Suggestion forms,
toll-free numbers, Web sites, and e-mail addresses allow for quick, two-way communication. The
3M Company claims that over two-thirds of its product improvement ideas come from listening to
customer complaints.
Given the potential downside of having an unhappy customer, it’s critical that marketers deal
with negative experiences properly.35 Beyond that, the following procedures can help to recover
customer goodwill:36
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Set up a 7-day, 24-hour toll-free hotline (by phone, fax, or e-mail) to receive and act on
customer complaints.
Contact the complaining customer as quickly as possible. The slower the company is to
respond, the more dissatisfaction may grow and lead to negative word of mouth.
Accept responsibility for the customer’s disappointment; don’t blame the customer.
Use customer service people who are empathic.
Resolve the complaint swiftly and to the customer’s satisfaction. Some complaining customers
are not looking for compensation so much as a sign that the company cares.

Product and Service Quality
Satisfaction will also depend on product and service quality. What exactly is quality? Various experts have defined it as “fitness for use,” “conformance to requirements,” and “freedom from variation.” We will use the American Society for Quality’s definition: Quality is the totality of features
and characteristics of a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied
needs.37 This is clearly a customer-centered definition. We can say the seller has delivered quality
whenever its product or service meets or exceeds the customers’ expectations.
A company that satisfies most of its customers’ needs most of the time is called a quality company, but we need to distinguish between conformance quality and performance quality (or grade).
A Lexus provides higher performance quality than a Hyundai: The Lexus rides smoother, goes
faster, and lasts longer. Yet both a Lexus and a Hyundai deliver the same conformance quality if all
the units deliver their respective promised quality.

IMPACT OF QUALITY Product and service quality, customer satisfaction, and company
profitability are intimately connected. Higher levels of quality result in higher levels of customer
satisfaction, which support higher prices and (often) lower costs. Studies have shown a high
correlation between relative product quality and company profitability.38 The drive to produce
goods that are superior in world markets has led some countries—and groups of countries—to
recognize or award prizes to companies that exemplify the best quality practices, such as the
Deming Prize in Japan, the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award in the United States, and the
European Quality Award.
Companies that have lowered costs to cut corners have paid the price when the quality of the
customer experience suffers:39 When Northwest Airlines stopped offering free magazines, pillows,
movies, and even minibags of pretzels on domestic flights, it also raised prices and reduced its flight
schedule. As one frequent flier noted, “Northwest acts low cost without being low cost.” Not surprisingly, Northwest came in last of all top U.S. airlines in both the ACS index and J.D. Power’s customer satisfaction poll soon thereafter. Home Depot also encountered turbulence when it became
overly focused on cost cutting.

| CHAPTER 5

131

132

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Home Depot When Home Depot decided to expand into the contractor supply business, while also cutting costs and streamlining operations in 1,816 U.S. stores, it
replaced many full-time workers with part-timers who soon made up about 40 percent of
store staff. The chain’s ACS index of customer satisfaction dropped to the bottom among
major U.S. retailers, 11 points behind customer-friendly competitor Lowe’s, and its share
price slid 24 percent during the biggest home improvement boom in
U.S. history. To turn the company around, new management simplified
operations. Store managers were given three goals to achieve—
cleaner warehouses, stocked shelves, and top customer service. The
200+ e-mails sent from the corporate office on a typical Monday were
replaced with one—the rest of the information was made available
online. In a new practice called “power hours,” on weekdays from 10 AM
to 2 PM and all day Saturday and Sunday, employees were to do nothing
but serve customers. To make sure the new strategy stuck, performance
reviews were changed so store employees were evaluated almost
entirely on customer service.40
Quality is clearly the key to value creation and customer satisfaction. Total quality is everyone’s job, just as marketing is
everyone’s job. “Marketing Memo: Marketing and Total Quality”
outlines the role of marketing in maximizing total quality for
the firm.
Home Depot instituted a number
of changes in its operations to
improve customer service and
satisfaction.

Maximizing Customer
Lifetime Value
Ultimately, marketing is the art of attracting and keeping profitable customers. Yet every company
loses money on some of its customers. The well-known 80–20 rule states that 80 percent or more of
the company’s profits come from the top 20 percent of its customers. Some cases may be more
extreme—the most profitable 20 percent of customers (on a per capita basis) may contribute as
much as 150 percent to 300 percent of profitability. The least profitable 10 percent to 20 percent, on
the other hand, can actually reduce profits between 50 percent to 200 percent per account, with the
middle 60 percent to 70 percent breaking even.41 The implication is that a company could improve
its profits by “firing” its worst customers.

marketing

Memo

Marketing and Total Quality

Marketers play several roles in helping their companies define and deliver
high-quality goods and services to target customers
• They correctly identify customers’ needs and requirements.
• They communicate customer expectations properly to product designers.
• They make sure customers’ orders are filled correctly and on time.
• They check that customers have received proper instructions, training,
and technical assistance in the use of the product.

• They stay in touch with customers after the sale to ensure they are, and
remain, satisfied.
• They gather customer ideas for product and service improvements
and convey them to the appropriate departments.
When marketers do all this, they make substantial contributions to total
quality management and customer satisfaction, as well as to customer and
company profitability.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

| CHAPTER 5

133

It’s not always the company’s largest customers, who can demand considerable service and deep
discounts, who yield the most profit. The smallest customers pay full price and receive minimal
service, but the costs of transacting with them can reduce their profitability. Midsize customers
who receive good service and pay nearly full price are often the most profitable.

Customer Profitability
A profitable customer is a person, household, or company that over time yields a revenue stream
exceeding by an acceptable amount the company’s cost stream for attracting, selling, and serving
that customer. Note the emphasis is on the lifetime stream of revenue and cost, not the profit from
a particular transaction.42 Marketers can assess customer profitability individually, by market segment, or by channel.
Many companies measure customer satisfaction, but few measure individual customer profitability.43 Banks claim this is a difficult task, because each customer uses different banking services
and the transactions are logged in different departments. However, the number of unprofitable
customers in their customer base has appalled banks that have succeeded in linking customer
transactions. Some report losing money on over 45 percent of their retail customers.

CUSTOMER PROFITABILITY ANALYSIS A useful type of profitability analysis is shown in
Figure 5.3.44 Customers are arrayed along the columns and products along the rows. Each cell
contains a symbol representing the profitability of selling that product to that customer. Customer
1 is very profitable; he buys two profit-making products (P1 and P2). Customer 2 yields mixed
profitability; he buys one profitable product (P1) and one unprofitable product (P3). Customer 3
is a losing customer because he buys one profitable product (P1) and two unprofitable products
(P3 and P4).
What can the company do about customers 2 and 3? (1) It can raise the price of its less profitable
products or eliminate them, or (2) it can try to sell customers 2 and 3 its profit-making products.
Unprofitable customers who defect should not concern the company. In fact, the company should
encourage them to switch to competitors.
Customer profitability analysis (CPA) is best conducted with the tools of an accounting technique called activity-based costing (ABC). ABC accounting tries to identify the real costs associated with serving each customer—the costs of products and services based on the resources they
consume. The company estimates all revenue coming from the customer, less all costs.
With ABC, the costs should include the cost not only of making and distributing the products
and services, but also of taking phone calls from the customer, traveling to visit the customer, paying for entertainment and gifts—all the company’s resources that go into serving that customer.
ABC also allocates indirect costs like clerical costs, office expenses, supplies, and so on, to the activities that use them, rather than in some proportion to direct costs. Both variable and overhead costs
are tagged back to each customer.
Companies that fail to measure their costs correctly are also not measuring their profit correctly
and are likely to misallocate their marketing effort. The key to effectively employing ABC is to
define and judge “activities” properly. One time-based solution calculates the cost of one minute of
overhead and then decides how much of this cost each activity uses.45
Customers
C1
P1

+

P2

+

C2

+

|Fig. 5.3|
C3

+

Highly profitable
product
Profitable
product

Products

–

P3
P4
High-profit
customer

Mixed-bag
customer

–

Unprofitable
product

–

Highly unprofitable
product

Losing
customer

Customer-Product
Profitability Analysis

134

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Measuring Customer Lifetime Value
The case for maximizing long-term customer profitability is captured in the concept of customer
lifetime value.46 Customer lifetime value (CLV) describes the net present value of the stream of future profits expected over the customer’s lifetime purchases. The company must subtract from its
expected revenues the expected costs of attracting, selling, and servicing the account of that customer, applying the appropriate discount rate (say, between 10 percent and 20 percent, depending
on cost of capital and risk attitudes). Lifetime value calculations for a product or service can add up
to tens of thousands of dollars or even into six figures.47
Many methods exist to measure CLV.48 “Marketing Memo: Calculating Customer Lifetime
Value” illustrates one. CLV calculations provide a formal quantitative framework for planning
customer investment and help marketers adopt a long-term perspective. One challenge, however, is to arrive at reliable cost and revenue estimates. Marketers who use CLV concepts must
also take into account the short-term, brand-building marketing activities that help increase
customer loyalty.

Cultivating Customer Relationships
Companies are using information about customers to enact precision marketing designed to build
strong long-term relationships.49 Information is easy to differentiate, customize, personalize, and
dispatch over networks at incredible speed.

marketing
Calculating Customer Lifetime Value

Memo

Researchers and practitioners have used many different approaches for
modeling and estimating CLV. Columbia’s Don Lehmann and Harvard’s Sunil
Gupta recommend the following formula to estimate the CLV for a not-yetacquired customer:
T

CLV = a

1pt - ct2rt

t=0

11 + i 2t

- AC

where pt = price paid by a consumer at time t,

ct = direct cost of servicing the customer at time t,
i = discount rate or cost of capital for the firm,
rt = probability of customer repeat buying or being “alive” at time t,
AC = acquisition cost,
T = time horizon for estimating CLV.
A key decision is what time horizon to use for estimating CLV.
Typically, three to five years is reasonable. With this information and
estimates of other variables, we can calculate CLV using spreadsheet
analysis.

Gupta and Lehmann illustrate their approach by calculating the CLV of
100 customers over a 10-year period (see
Table 5.3). In this example,
the firm acquires 100 customers with an acquisition cost per customer of
$40. Therefore, in year 0, it spends $4,000. Some of these customers defect each year. The present value of the profits from this cohort of customers
over 10 years is $13,286.52. The net CLV (after deducting acquisition costs)
is $9,286.52, or $92.87 per customer.
Using an infinite time horizon avoids having to select an arbitrary time
horizon for calculating CLV. In the case of an infinite time horizon, if margins
(price minus cost) and retention rates stay constant over time, the future CLV
of an existing customer simplifies to the following:
q

CLV = a

mrt

t
t = 1 (1 + i )

=m

r
(1 + i - r )

In other words, CLV simply becomes margin (m) times a margin multiple
[r/(1 + i – r )].
Table 5.4 shows the margin multiple for various combinations of r
and i and a simple way to estimate CLV of a customer. When retention rate
is 80 percent and discount rate is 12 percent, the margin multiple is about
two and a half. Therefore, the future CLV of an existing customer in this
scenario is simply his or her annual margin multiplied by 2.5.

Sources: Sunil Gupta and Donald R. Lehmann, “Models of Customer Value,” Berend Wierenga, ed., Handbook of Marketing Decision Models (Berlin, Germany: Springer
Science and Business Media, 2007); Sunil Gupta and Donald R. Lehmann, “Customers as Assets,” Journal of Interactive Marketing 17, no. 1 (Winter 2006), pp. 9–24; Sunil
Gupta and Donald R. Lehmann, Managing Customers as Investments (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2005); Peter Fader, Bruce Hardie, and Ka Lee, “RFM
and CLV: Using Iso-Value Curves for Customer Base Analysis,” Journal of Marketing Research 42, no. 4 (November 2005), pp. 415–30; Sunil Gupta, Donald R. Lehmann, and
Jennifer Ames Stuart, “Valuing Customers,” Journal of Marketing Research 41, no. 1 (February 2004), pp. 7–18; Werner J. Reinartz and V. Kumar, “On the Profitability of LongLife Customers in a Noncontractual Setting: An Empirical Investigation and Implications for Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 64 (October 2000), pp. 17–35.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

TABLE 5.3

| CHAPTER 5

135

A Hypothetical Example to Illustrate CLV Calculations
Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Year 6

Year 7

100

90

80

72

60

48

34

23

12

6

2

Revenue per Customer

100

110

120

125

130

135

140

142

143

145

Variable Cost per
Customer
Margin per Customer

70

72

75

76

78

79

80

81

82

83

30

38

45

49

52

56

60

61

61

62

2,700

3,040

3,240

2,940

2,496

1,904

1,380

732

Number of Customers

Year 8 Year 9 Year 10

Acquisition Cost per
Customer
Total Cost or Profit

–4,000

366

124

Present Value

–4,000 2,454.55 2,512.40 2,434.26 2,008.06 1,549.82 1,074.76 708.16 341.48 155.22

47.81

TABLE 5.4

40

Margin Multiple
Discount Rate

Retention Rate

10%

12%

14%

16%

60%

1.20

1.5

1.11

1.07

70%

1.75

1.67

1.59

1.52

80%

2.67

2.50

2.35

2.22

90%

4.50

4.09

3.75

3.46

But information cuts both ways. For instance, customers now have a quick and easy means of doing
comparison shopping through sites such as Bizrate.com, Shopping.com, and PriceGrabber.com. The
Internet also facilitates communication between customers. Web sites such as Epinions.com and
Yelp.com enable customers to share information about their experiences with various products and
services. Customer empowerment has become a way of life for many companies that have had to adjust
to a shift in the power with their customer relationships.

Customer Relationship Management
Customer relationship management (CRM) is the process of carefully managing detailed
information about individual customers and all customer “touch points” to maximize loyalty.50
A customer touch point is any occasion on which a customer encounters the brand and product—
from actual experience to personal or mass communications to casual observation. For a hotel,
the touch points include reservations, check-in and checkout, frequent-stay programs, room
service, business services, exercise facilities, laundry service, restaurants, and bars. The Four
Seasons relies on personal touches, such as a staff that always addresses guests by name, highpowered employees who understand the needs of sophisticated business travelers, and at least
one best-in-region facility, such as a premier restaurant or spa.51
CRM enables companies to provide excellent real-time customer service through the effective
use of individual account information. Based on what they know about each valued customer,
companies can customize market offerings, services, programs, messages, and media. CRM is
important because a major driver of company profitability is the aggregate value of the company’s
customer base.52

PERSONALIZING MARKETING The widespread usage of the Internet allows marketers to
abandon the mass market practices that built brand powerhouses in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s for

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

new approaches that are a throwback to marketing practices from a century ago, when merchants
literally knew their customers by name. Personalizing marketing is about making sure the brand and
its marketing are as relevant as possible to as many customers as possible—a challenge, given that
no two customers are identical.

Jones Soda

PART 3

Jones Soda

Peter van Stolk founded Jones Soda on the premise that Gen Y
consumers would be more accepting of a new soft drink brand if they felt they discovered it
themselves. Jones Soda initially was sold only in shops that sell surfboards, snowboards,
and skateboards. The Jones Soda Web site would encourage fans to send in personal photos for possible use on Jones Soda labels. Although only a small number were picked from
tens of thousands of entries, the approach helped create relevance and an emotional connection.
Customers could also purchase bottles with customized labels. Famous for unusual flavors such as
Turkey and Gravy, Pineapple Upside Down, Berry White (a pun on singer Barry White), Purple Carrot, and
Lemon Drop Dead, the company also adds pithy words of wisdom from customers under the bottle cap
to create additional relevance and distinctiveness. The approach worked for a number of years—
revenue grew at 15 percent to 30 percent annually—until an ill-fated foray into canned soda and selling
through mass market retailers Target and Walmart resulted in some devastating financial losses and a
vow to return to the company’s personal-touch roots.53
An increasingly essential ingredient for the best relationship marketing today is the right technology. GE Plastics could not target its e-mail effectively to different customers if it were not for
advances in database software. Dell could not customize computer ordering for its global corporate
customers without advances in Web technology. Companies are using e-mail, Web sites, call centers,
databases, and database software to foster continuous contact between company and customer.
E-commerce companies looking to attract and retain customers are discovering that personalization goes beyond creating customized information.54 For example, the Lands’ End Live Web
site offers visitors the opportunity to talk with a customer service representative. Nordstrom takes
a similar approach to ensure online buyers are as satisfied with the company’s customer service as
in-store visitors. Domino’s has put the customer in charge of ordering a pizza delivery every step
of the way.

Domino’s

136

Domino’s Domino’s has introduced a new “build-your-own-pizza” feature on its

Web site that allows customers to watch a simulated photographic version of their pizza as they
select a size, choose a sauce, and add toppings. The Web site also shows exactly what the completed pizza would cost in the process. It lets customers track orders from when the pizza enters
the oven to when it leaves the store. Domino’s also introduced a new point-of-sale system that
streamlined the logistics of online and phone orders. This system improved accuracy, increased repeat visits,
and boosted revenues and processes.55
Companies are also recognizing the importance of the personal component to CRM and what
happens once customers make actual contact with the company. Employees can create strong
bonds with customers by individualizing and personalizing relationships. In essence, thoughtful
companies turn their customers into clients. Here is the distinction:
Customers may be nameless to the institution; clients cannot be nameless. Customers are
served as part of the mass or as part of larger segments; clients are served on an individual
basis. Customers are served by anyone who happens to be available; clients are served by
the professional assigned to them.56
To adapt to customers’ increased desire for personalization, marketers have embraced concepts
such as permission marketing and one-to-one marketing.
Permission marketing, the practice of marketing to consumers only after gaining their expressed
permission, is based on the premise that marketers can no longer use “interruption marketing”
via mass media campaigns. According to Seth Godin, a pioneer in the technique, marketers can

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

develop stronger consumer relationships by respecting consumers’ wishes and sending messages
only when they express a willingness to become more involved with the brand.57 Godin believes
permission marketing works because it is “anticipated, personal, and relevant.”
Permission marketing, like other personalization approaches, presumes consumers know
what they want. But in many cases, consumers have undefined, ambiguous, or conflicting preferences. “Participatory marketing” may be a more appropriate concept than permission marketing, because marketers and consumers need to work together to find out how the firm can best
satisfy consumers.
Don Peppers and Martha Rogers outline a four-step framework for one-to-one marketing that
can be adapted to CRM marketing as follows:58
1.
2.

3.

4.

Identify your prospects and customers. Don’t go after everyone. Build, maintain, and mine a
rich customer database with information from all the channels and customer touch points.
Differentiate customers in terms of (1) their needs and (2) their value to your company. Spend
proportionately more effort on the most valuable customers (MVCs). Apply activity-based costing and calculate customer lifetime value. Estimate net present value of all future profits from
purchases, margin levels, and referrals, less customer-specific servicing costs.
Interact with individual customers to improve your knowledge about their individual needs
and to build stronger relationships. Formulate customized offerings you can communicate
in a personalized way.
Customize products, services, and messages to each customer. Facilitate customer interaction
through the company contact center and Web site.

One-to-one marketing is not for every company: It works best for firms that normally collect a
great deal of individual customer information and carry a lot of products that can be cross-sold,
need periodic replacement or upgrading, and offer high value. For others, the required investment
in information collection, hardware, and software may exceed the payout. With automobiles that
can cost over $100,000, Aston Martin engages in one-to-one marketing with a select group of customers. High-end dealerships offer separate owners-only clubroom sections and weekend getaways
to test-drive new models.59

CUSTOMER EMPOWERMENT Often seen as the flag bearer for marketing best practices,
P&G’s former chairman, A.G. Lafley, created shockwaves with his Association of National
Advertisers’ speech in October 2006. “The power is with the consumer,” proclaimed Lafley, and
“marketers and retailers are scrambling to keep up with her. Consumers are beginning in a very real
sense to own our brands and participate in their creation. We need to learn to let go.” In support of
his contention, Lafley pointed out how a teenager had created an animated spot for Pringles snacks
that was posted on YouTube; how Pantene, the hair care products company, had created a campaign
that encouraged women to cut their hair and donate the clippings to make wigs for cancer patients;
and how sales of Cover Girl Outlast lipstick increased 25 percent after the firm put mirrored ads in
women’s restrooms asking, “Is your lipstick still on?” and ran targeted five-second TV ads with the
same theme.60
Other marketers have begun to advocate a “bottom-up” grassroots approach to marketing,
rather than the more traditional “top-down” approach in which marketers feel they are calling the
shots. Burger King has launched attention-getting edgy campaigns in recent years (“Whopper
Freakout,”“Subservient Chicken,” and “Wake Up With the King”) on consumer-friendly new media
such as YouTube, MySpace, video games, and iPods. Allowing the customer to take charge just
makes sense for a brand whose slogan is “Have It Your Way” and whose main rival, McDonald’s,
already owns the more staid family market.
Marketers are helping consumers become evangelists for brands by providing them resources
and opportunities to demonstrate their passion. Doritos held a contest to let consumers name their
next flavor. Converse asked amateur filmmakers to submit 30-second short films that demonstrated their inspiration from the iconic sneaker brand. The best of the 1,800 submissions were
showcased in the Converse Gallery Web site, and the best of the best became TV commercials. Sales
of shoes via the Web site doubled in the month after the gallery’s launch.61
Even business-to-business firms are getting into the action. PAETEC provides telecommunications services to hotels, universities, and other companies. It has grown into a $500 million
company in six years, and its growth is due entirely to customer evangelism. PAETEC’s primary
marketing strategy: Invite current customers and key prospects to dine on PAETEC’s tab and meet

| CHAPTER 5

137

138

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Burger King’s “Subservient
Chicken” marketing campaign
reinforced the brand’s core
promise of putting the customer
in charge.

one another. No boring PowerPoint presentations here, just customers talking about their telecommunications challenges and their unfiltered experiences being PAETEC customers. Prospects are
sold on the company by other customers.62
Although much has been made of the newly empowered consumer—in charge, setting the direction of the brand, and playing a much bigger role in how it is marketed—it’s still true that only
some consumers want to get involved with some of the brands they use and, even then, only some of
the time. Consumers have lives, jobs, families, hobbies, goals, and commitments, and many things
matter more to them than the brands they purchase and consume. Understanding how to best market a brand given such diversity is crucially important.

CUSTOMER REVIEWS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Although the strongest influence
on consumer choice remains “recommended by relative/friend,” an increasingly important decision
factor is “recommendations from consumers.” With increasing mistrust of some companies and
their advertising, online customer ratings and reviews are playing an important role for Internet
retailers such as Amazon.com and Shop.com.
Online pet food retailer PETCO actually started using consumer product ratings and reviews
in e-mails and banner ads, finding the click-through rate increased considerably as a result.63
Brick-and-mortar retailers such as Staples and Cabela’s are also recognizing the power of consumer
reviews and have begun to display them in their stores.64
Despite consumer acceptance of such reviews, however, their quality and integrity is always in
question. In one famous example, over a period of seven years, the cofounder and CEO of Whole
Foods Market reportedly posted more than 1,100 entries on Yahoo! Finance’s online bulletin board
under a pseudonym, praising his company and criticizing competitors.
Some sites offer summaries of reviews to provide a range of product evaluations. Metacritic
aggregates music, game, TV, and movie reviews from leading critics—often from more than 100
publications—averaged into a single 1 to 100 score. Review sites are important in the video game
industry because of the influence they wield and the product’s high selling price—often $50 to $60.
Some game companies tie bonuses for their developers to game scores on the more popular sites. If
a major new release doesn’t make the 85-plus cutoff, the publisher’s stock price may even drop.65
Bloggers who review products or services have become important because they may have thousands of followers; blogs are often among the top links returned in online searches for certain
brands or categories. A company’s PR department may track popular blogs via online services
such as Google alerts, BlogPulse, and Technorati. Firms also court the favor of key bloggers via free

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

samples, advance information, and special treatment. Most bloggers
disclose when they are given free samples by companies.
For smaller brands with limited media budgets, online word of
mouth is critical. To generate prelaunch buzz for one of its new
hot cereals, organic food maker Amy’s Kitchen shipped out
samples before its release to several of the 50 or so vegan, glutenfree, or vegetarian food bloggers the company tracks. When favorable reviews appeared on these blogs, the company was besieged
by e-mails asking where the cereal could be bought.66
Negative reviews actually can be surprisingly helpful. A January
2007 Forrester study of 10,000 consumers of Amazon.com’s electronics and home and garden products found that 50 percent found
negative reviews helpful. Most consumers purchased the products
regardless of negative comments because they felt the comments reflected personal tastes and opinions that differed from their own.
Because consumers can better learn the advantages and disadvantages of products through negative reviews, fewer product returns
may result, saving retailers and producers money.67
Online retailers often add their own recommendations, “If you
like that black purse, you’ll love this red blouse.” One source estimated
that recommendation systems contribute 10 percent to 30 percent of
an online retailer’s sales. Specialized software tools help online retailers facilitate customer “discovery” or unplanned purchases. When
Blockbuster adopted one such system, cancellation rates fell and subscribers nearly doubled the number of movies on their order lists.68
At the same time, online companies need to make sure their attempts to create relationships
with customers don’t backfire, as when customers are bombarded by computer-generated recommendations that consistently miss the mark. Buy a lot of baby gifts on Amazon.com, and your
personalized recommendations suddenly don’t look so personal! E-tailers need to recognize the
limitations of online personalization at the same time that they try harder to find technology and
processes that really work.

Attracting and Retaining Customers
Companies seeking to expand their profits and sales must spend considerable time and resources
searching for new customers. To generate leads, they develop ads and place them in media that will
reach new prospects; send direct mail and e-mails to possible new prospects; send their salespeople
to participate in trade shows where they might find new leads; purchase names from list brokers;
and so on.
Different acquisition methods yield customers with varying CLVs. One study showed that customers acquired through the offer of a 35 percent discount had about one-half the long-term value
of customers acquired without any discount.69 Campaigns that target loyal customers by reinforcing the benefits they enjoy often also attract new customers. Two-thirds of the considerable growth
spurred by UK mobile communication leader O2’s loyalty strategy was attributed to recruitment of
new customers, the remainder from reduced defection.70

REDUCING DEFECTION It is not enough to attract new customers; the company must also
keep them and increase their business.71 Too many companies suffer from high customer churn or
defection. Adding customers here is like adding water to a leaking bucket.
Cellular carriers and cable TV operators are plagued by “spinners,” customers who switch carriers at least three times a year looking for the best deal. Many lose 25 percent of their subscribers
each year, at an estimated cost of $2 billion to $4 billion. Some of the dissatisfaction defecting customers cite comes from unmet needs and expectations, poor product/service quality and high
complexity, and billing errors.72
To reduce the defection rate, the company must:
1.

Define and measure its retention rate. For a magazine, subscription renewal rate is a good
measure of retention. For a college, it could be first- to second-year retention rate, or class
graduation rate.

| CHAPTER 5

139

Amy’s Kitchen sent product samples to carefully selected bloggers
to quickly spread the word about
its new products.

140

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

2.

3.

Distinguish the causes of customer attrition and identify those that can be managed better. Not
much can be done about customers who leave the region or go out of business, but much can be
done about those driven away by poor service, shoddy products, or high prices.73
Compare the lost customer’s lifetime value to the costs of reducing the defection rate. As long
as the cost to discourage defection is lower than the lost profit, spend the money to try to retain the customer.

RETENTION DYNAMICS
Figure 5.4 shows the main steps in attracting and retaining
customers in terms of a funnel and some sample questions to measure customer progress through
the funnel. The marketing funnel identifies the percentage of the potential target market at each
stage in the decision process, from merely aware to highly loyal. Consumers must move through
each stage before becoming loyal customers. Some marketers extend the funnel to include loyal
customers who are brand advocates or even partners with the firm.
By calculating conversion rates—the percentage of customers at one stage who move to the
next—the funnel allows marketers to identify any bottleneck stage or barrier to building a loyal
customer franchise. If the percentage of recent users is significantly lower than triers, for instance,
something might be wrong with the product or service that prevents repeat buying.
The funnel also emphasizes how important it is not just to attract new customers, but to retain
and cultivate existing ones. Satisfied customers are the company’s customer relationship capital. If
the company were sold, the acquiring company would pay not only for the plant and equipment
and brand name, but also for the delivered customer base, the number and value of customers who
will do business with the new firm. Consider this data about customer retention:74
•
•
•
•

Acquiring new customers can cost five times more than satisfying and retaining current ones. It
requires a great deal of effort to induce satisfied customers to switch from their current suppliers.
The average company loses 10 percent of its customers each year.
A 5 percent reduction in the customer defection rate can increase profits by 25 percent to
85 percent, depending on the industry.
Profit rate tends to increase over the life of the retained customer due to increased purchases,
referrals, price premiums, and reduced operating costs to service.

MANAGING THE CUSTOMER BASE Customer profitability analysis and the marketing
funnel help marketers decide how to manage groups of customers that vary in loyalty, profitability,
and other factors.75 A key driver of shareholder value is the aggregate value of the customer base.
Winning companies improve that value by excelling at strategies like the following:
•

•

Reducing the rate of customer defection. Selecting and training employees to be knowledgeable and friendly increases the likelihood that customers’ shopping questions will be answered
satisfactorily. Whole Foods, the world’s largest retailer of natural and organic foods, woos
customers with a commitment to market the best foods and a team concept for employees.
Increasing the longevity of the customer relationship. The more engaged with the company, the
more likely a customer is to stick around. Nearly 65 percent of new Honda purchases replace an
older Honda. Drivers cited Honda’s reputation for creating safe vehicles with high resale value.

|Fig. 5.4|

The Marketing
Funnel

Target
market

Aware

• I have
heard of
the brand.

Open
to trial

• I am open
to trying
the brand
but have
not done
so.

Trier
(nonrejecters)

Recent user
(e.g., Once
in past
3 months)

• I have
tried the
brand and
would use
again but
have not
done so in
the past
3 months.

• I have
used the
brand in
the past
3 months
but am
not a
regular
user.

Regular user
Most
(e.g., At least
once every often used
2 weeks)
• I am a
regular
user but
this is not
my most
often
used
brand.

• I use this
brand
most often
even
though I
do use
other
brands.

Loyal

• I always
use this
brand as
long as
it is
available.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

•

•

•

| CHAPTER 5

Enhancing the growth potential of each customer through “share of wallet,” cross-selling, and
up-selling.76 Sales from existing customers can be increased with new offerings and opportunities. Harley-Davidson sells more than motorcycles and accessories like gloves, leather jackets,
helmets, and sunglasses. Its dealerships sell more than 3,000 items of clothing—some even have
fitting rooms. Licensed goods sold by others range from predictable items (shot glasses, cue
balls, and Zippo cigarette lighters) to the more surprising (cologne, dolls, and cell phones).
Making low-profit customers more profitable or terminating them. To avoid the direct need
for termination, marketers can encourage unprofitable customers to buy more or in larger
quantities, forgo certain features or services, or pay higher amounts or fees.77 Banks, phone
companies, and travel agencies all now charge for once-free services to ensure minimum revenue levels. Firms can also discourage those with questionable profitability prospects.
Progressive Insurance screens customers and diverts the potentially unprofitable to competitors.78 “Free” customers who pay little or nothing and are subsidized by paying customers—
as in print and online media, employment and dating services, and shopping malls—may still
create useful direct and indirect network effects, however, an important function.79
Focusing disproportionate effort on high-profit customers. The most profitable customers
can be treated in a special way. Thoughtful gestures such as birthday greetings, small gifts, or
invitations to special sports or arts events can send them a strong positive signal.

Building Loyalty
Creating a strong, tight connection to customers is the dream of any marketer and often the key to
long-term marketing success. Companies that want to form such bonds should heed some specific
considerations (see
Figure 5.5). One set of researchers sees retention-building activities as
adding financial benefits, social benefits, or structural ties.80 The following sections explain three
types of marketing activities companies are using to improve loyalty and retention.

INTERACTING WITH CUSTOMERS Listening to customers is crucial to customer
relationship management. Some companies have created an ongoing mechanism that keeps their
marketers permanently plugged in to frontline customer feedback.
•

•

•

Deere & Company, which makes John Deere tractors and has a superb record of customer
loyalty—nearly 98 percent annual retention in some product areas—has used retired employees
to interview defectors and customers.81
Chicken of the Sea has 80,000 members in its Mermaid Club, a core-customer group that receives
special offers, health tips and articles, new product updates, and an informative e-newsletter. In
return, club members provide valuable feedback on what the company is doing and thinking of
doing. Feedback from club members has helped design the brand’s Web site, develop messages for
TV advertising, and craft the look and text on the packaging.82
Build-A-Bear Workshop uses a “Cub Advisory Board” as a feedback and decision-input body.
The board is made up of twenty 8- to 12-year-olds who review new-product ideas and give a
“paws up or down.” Many products in the stores are customer ideas.83

But listening is only part of the story. It is also important to be a customer advocate and, as
much as possible, take the customers’ side and understand their point of view.84 USAA Insurance’s
legendary quality of service has led to the highest customer satisfaction in the industry. USAA subscribers will often tell stories about how the company looks out for them, even counseling them not

• Create superior products, services, and experiences for the target market.
• Get cross-departmental participation in planning and managing the customer satisfaction and retention process.
• Integrate the “Voice of the Customer” to capture their stated and unstated needs or requirements in all
business decisions.

• Organize and make accessible a database of information on individual customer needs, preferences,
contacts, purchase frequency, and satisfaction.

• Make it easy for customers to reach appropriate company staff and express their needs, perceptions, and complaints.
• Assess the potential of frequency programs and club marketing programs.
• Run award programs recognizing outstanding employees.

|Fig. 5.5|

Forming Strong
Customer Bonds

141

142

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Feedback from members of its
Mermaid Club has helped Chicken
of the Sea improve its marketing
and customer appeal.

to take out more insurance than they need. With such levels of trust, USAA enjoys high customer
loyalty and significant cross-selling opportunities.85

DEVELOPING LOYALTY PROGRAMS Frequency programs (FPs) are designed to reward
customers who buy frequently and in substantial amounts.86 They can help build long-term
loyalty with high CLV customers, creating cross-selling opportunities in the process. Pioneered by
the airlines, hotels, and credit card companies, FPs now exist in many other industries. Most
supermarket chains offer price club cards that grant discounts on certain items.87
Typically, the first company to introduce a FP in an industry gains the most benefit, especially if
competitors are slow to respond. After competitors react, FPs can become a financial burden to all the
offering companies, but some companies are more efficient and creative in managing them. Some FPs
generate rewards in a way that locks customers in and creates significant costs to switching. FPs can
also produce a psychological boost and a feeling of being special and elite that customers value.88
Club membership programs can be open to everyone who purchases a product or service, or
limited to an affinity group or those willing to pay a small fee. Although open clubs are good for
building a database or snagging customers from competitors, limited-membership clubs are
more powerful long-term loyalty builders. Fees and membership conditions prevent those with
only a fleeting interest in a company’s products from joining. These clubs attract and keep those
customers responsible for the largest portion of business. Apple has a highly successful club.

Apple

Apple

Apple encourages owners of its computers to form local Apple-user
groups. By 2009, there were over 700, ranging in size from fewer than 30 members to
over 1,000. The groups provide Apple owners with opportunities to learn more about their
computers, share ideas, and get product discounts. They sponsor special activities and
events and perform community service. A visit to Apple’s Web site will help a customer find
a nearby user group.89

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

CREATING INSTITUTIONAL TIES The company may supply customers with special
equipment or computer links that help them manage orders, payroll, and inventory. Customers are
less inclined to switch to another supplier when it means high capital costs, high search costs, or
the loss of loyal-customer discounts. A good example is McKesson Corporation, a leading
pharmaceutical wholesaler, which invested millions of dollars in EDI (Electronic Data Interchange)
capabilities to help independent pharmacies manage inventory, order-entry processes, and shelf
space. Another example is Milliken & Company, which provides proprietary software programs,
marketing research, sales training, and sales leads to loyal customers.

Win-Backs
Regardless of how hard companies may try, some customers inevitably become inactive or drop
out. The challenge is to reactivate them through win-back strategies.90 It’s often easier to reattract
ex-customers (because the company knows their names and histories) than to find new ones. Exit
interviews and lost-customer surveys can uncover sources of dissatisfaction and help win back only
those with strong profit potential.91

Customer Databases
and Database Marketing
Marketers must know their customers.92 And in order to know the customer, the company must
collect information and store it in a database from which to conduct database marketing. A
customer database is an organized collection of comprehensive information about individual customers or prospects that is current, accessible, and actionable for lead generation, lead qualification, sale of a product or service, or maintenance of customer relationships. Database marketing is
the process of building, maintaining, and using customer databases and other databases (products,
suppliers, resellers) to contact, transact, and build customer relationships.

Customer Databases
Many companies confuse a customer mailing list with a customer database. A customer mailing
list is simply a set of names, addresses, and telephone numbers. A customer database contains
much more information, accumulated through customer transactions, registration information,
telephone queries, cookies, and every customer contact.
Ideally, a customer database also contains the consumer’s past purchases, demographics
(age, income, family members, birthdays), psychographics (activities, interests, and opinions),
mediagraphics (preferred media), and other useful information. The catalog company
Fingerhut possesses some 1,400 pieces of information about each of the 30 million households
in its massive customer database.
Ideally, a business database contains business customers’ past purchases; past volumes, prices,
and profits; buyer team member names (and ages, birthdays, hobbies, and favorite foods); status of
current contracts; an estimate of the supplier’s share of the customer’s business; competitive suppliers; assessment of competitive strengths and weaknesses in selling and servicing the account; and
relevant customer buying practices, patterns, and policies.
A Latin American unit of the Swiss pharmaceutical firm Novartis keeps data on 100,000 of
Argentina’s farmers, knows their crop protection chemical purchases, groups them by value, and
treats each group differently.

Data Warehouses and Data Mining
Savvy companies capture information every time a customer comes into contact with any of their
departments, whether it is a customer purchase, a customer-requested service call, an online query,
or a mail-in rebate card.93 Banks and credit card companies, telephone companies, catalog marketers, and many other companies have a great deal of information about their customers, including not only addresses and phone numbers, but also transactions and enhanced data on age, family
size, income, and other demographic information.

| CHAPTER 5

143

144

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

dunnhumby

These data are collected by the company’s contact center and organized into a data warehouse
where marketers can capture, query, and analyze them to draw inferences about an individual customer’s needs and responses. Telemarketers can respond to customer inquiries based on a complete picture of the customer relationship, and customized marketing activities can be directed to
individual customers.

dunnhumby British research firm dunnhumby has increased the profitability of

struggling retailers by gleaning insights from their loyalty program data and credit card transactions. The firm helped British supermarket giant Tesco tailor coupons and special discounts to
its loyalty card shoppers. Tesco decided against dropping a poor-selling type of bread after
dunnhumby’s analysis revealed it was a “destination product” for a loyal cohort that would shop
elsewhere if it disappeared. Other U.S. clients have included Kroger, Macy’s, and Home Depot. For a major
European catalog company, dunnhumby found that not only did shoppers with different body types prefer different clothing styles, they also shopped at different times of the year: Slimmer consumers tended to buy early
in a new season, whereas larger folks tended to take fewer risks and wait until later in the season to see what
would be popular.94
Through data mining, marketing statisticians can extract from the mass of data useful information about individuals, trends, and segments. Data mining uses sophisticated statistical and mathematical techniques such as cluster analysis, automatic interaction detection, predictive modeling,
and neural networking. Some observers believe a proprietary database can provide a company with
a significant competitive advantage.95 See
Figure 5.6 for some examples.
In general, companies can use their databases in five ways:
1.

|Fig. 5.6|

Examples of Database
Marketing

To identify prospects—Many companies generate sales leads by advertising their product or
service. The ads generally contain a response feature, such as a business reply card or toll-free
phone number, and the company builds its database from customer responses. It sorts
through the database to identify the best prospects, then contacts them by mail or phone to try
to convert them into customers.
Qwest Twice a year Qwest sifts through its customer list looking for customers that have the potential to be
more profitable. The company’s database contains as many as 200 observations about each customer’s calling
patterns. By looking at demographic profiles, plus the mix of local versus long-distance calls or whether a consumer has voice mail, Qwest can estimate potential spending. Next, the company determines how much of the
customer’s likely telecom budget is already coming its way. Armed with that knowledge, Qwest sets a cutoff
point for how much to spend on marketing to this customer.
Royal Caribbean Royal Caribbean uses its database to offer spur-of-the-moment cruise packages to fill all
the berths on its ships. It focuses on retired people and single people because they are more able to make
quick commitments. Fewer empty berths mean maximized profits for the cruise line.
Fingerhut The skillful use of database marketing and relationship building has made catalog house Fingerhut
one of the nation’s largest direct-mail marketers. Not only is its database full of demographic details such as
age, marital status, and number of children, but it also tracks customers’ hobbies, interests, and birthdays.
Fingerhut tailors mail offers based on what each customer is likely to buy. Fingerhut stays in continuous touch
with customers through regular and special promotions, such as annual sweepstakes, free gifts, and deferred
billing. Now the company has applied its database marketing to its Web sites.
Mars Mars is a market leader not only in candy, but also in pet food. In Germany, Mars has compiled the
names of virtually every cat-owning family by contacting veterinarians and by advertising a free booklet titled
“How to Take Care of Your Cat.” Those who request the booklet fill out a questionnaire, so Mars knows the
cat’s name, age, and birthday. Mars now sends a birthday card to each cat each year, along with a new
catfood sample or money-saving coupons for Mars brands.
American Express It is no wonder that, at its secret location in Phoenix, security guards watch over American
Express’s 500 billion bytes of data on how its customers have used the company’s 35 million green, gold, and
platinum charge cards. Amex uses the database to include precisely targeted offers in its monthly mailing of
millions of customer bills.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

2.

3.

4.

5.

To decide which customers should receive a particular offer—Companies interested in selling, up-selling, and cross-selling set up criteria describing the ideal target customer for a particular offer. Then they search their customer databases for those who most closely resemble
the ideal. By noting response rates, a company can improve its targeting precision. Following a
sale, it can set up an automatic sequence of activities: One week later send a thank-you note;
five weeks later send a new offer; ten weeks later (if customer has not responded) phone and
offer a special discount.
To deepen customer loyalty—Companies can build interest and enthusiasm by remembering customer preferences and sending appropriate gifts, discount coupons, and interesting
reading material.
To reactivate customer purchases—Automatic mailing programs (automatic marketing) can
send out birthday or anniversary cards, holiday shopping reminders, or off-season promotions. The database can help the company make attractive or timely offers.
To avoid serious customer mistakes—A major bank confessed to a number of mistakes it had
made by not using its customer database well. In one case, the bank charged a customer a
penalty for late payment on his mortgage, failing to note he headed a company that was a
major depositor in this bank. The customer quit the bank. In a second case, two different staff
members of the bank phoned the same mortgage customer offering a home equity loan at
different prices. Neither knew the other had made the call. In a third case, the bank gave a
premium customer only standard service in another country.

The Downside of Database Marketing and CRM
Database marketing is most frequently used by business marketers and service providers that normally and easily collect a lot of customer data, like hotels, banks, airlines, and insurance, credit card,
and phone companies. Other types of companies in the best position to invest in CRM are those
that do a lot of cross-selling and up-selling (such as GE and Amazon.com) or whose customers
have highly differentiated needs and are of highly differentiated value to the company. Packagedgoods retailers and consumer packaged-goods companies use database marketing less frequently,
though some (such as Kraft, Quaker Oats, Ralston Purina, and Nabisco) have built databases for
certain brands. Some businesses cited as CRM successes include Enterprise Rent-A-Car, Pioneer
Hi-Bred Seeds, Fidelity Investments, Lexus, Intuit, and Capital One.96
Having covered the upside of database marketing, we also need to cover the downside. Five
main problems can prevent a firm from effectively using CRM.
1.

2.

3.

4.

Some situations are just not conducive to database management. Building a customer database may not be worthwhile when: (1) the product is a once-in-a-lifetime purchase (a grand
piano); (2) customers show little loyalty to a brand (there is lots of customer churn); (3) the
unit sale is very small (a candy bar) so CLV is low; (4) the cost of gathering information is too
high; and (5) there is no direct contact between the seller and ultimate buyer.
Building and maintaining a customer database requires a large, well-placed investment in
computer hardware, database software, analytical programs, communication links, and
skilled staff. It’s difficult to collect the right data, especially to capture all the occasions of
company interaction with individual customers. Deloitte Consulting found that 70 percent of
firms found little or no improvement from implementing CRM because the CRM system was
poorly designed, it became too expensive, users didn’t make much use of it or report much
benefit, and collaborators ignored the system. Sometimes companies mistakenly concentrate
on customer contact processes without making corresponding changes in internal structures
and systems.97
It may be difficult to get everyone in the company to be customer oriented and use the available information. Employees find it far easier to carry on traditional transaction marketing
than to practice CRM. Effective database marketing requires managing and training employees as well as dealers and suppliers.
Not all customers want a relationship with the company. Some may resent knowing the
company has collected that much personal information about them. Online companies
should explain their privacy policies and give consumers the right not to have their information stored. European countries do not look favorably on database marketing and are protective of consumers’ private information. The European Union passed a law handicapping the

| CHAPTER 5

145

146

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

5.

growth of database marketing in its 27 member countries. “Marketing Insight: The Behavioral
Targeting Controversy” reviews some privacy and security issues.
The assumptions behind CRM may not always hold true.98 High-volume customers often
know their value to a company and can leverage it to extract premium service and/or price discounts, so that it may not cost the firm less to serve them. Loyal customers may expect and demand more and resent any attempt to charge full prices. They may also be jealous of attention
lavished on other customers. When eBay began to chase big corporate customers such as IBM,
Disney, and Sears, some mom-and-pop businesses that helped build the brand felt abandoned.99 Loyal customers also may not necessarily be the best ambassadors for the brand. One
study found those who scored high on behavioral loyalty and bought a lot of a company’s
products were less active word-of-mouth marketers than customers who scored high on attitudinal loyalty and expressed greater commitment to the firm.

Thus, the benefits of database marketing do not come without significant costs and risks, not
only in collecting the original customer data, but also in maintaining and mining them. When it
works, a data warehouse yields more than it costs, but the data must be in good condition, and the
discovered relationships must be valid and acceptable to consumers.

Marketing Insight
The Behavioral Targeting
Controversy
The emergence of behavioral targeting is allowing companies to track
the online behavior of target customers and find the best match between ads and prospects. Tracking an individual’s Internet usage behavior relies on cookies—randomly assigned numbers, codes, and data
that are stored on the user’s computer hard drive and reveal which sites
have been visited, the amount of time spent there, which products or
pages were viewed, which search terms entered, and so on.
Most behavioral targeting is carried out by online ad networks
owned by large Internet firms such as Google or AOL, as well as by some
Internet service providers (ISPs). These online ad networks—such as
AdBrite, which has more than 70,000 sites in its online marketplace—
use cookies to track consumers’ movements through all their affiliated
sites. A new customer signing up with Microsoft for a free Hotmail e-mail
account, for example, is required to give the company his or her name,
age, gender, and zip code. Microsoft can then combine those facts with
information such as observed online behavior and characteristics of the
area in which the customer lives, to help advertisers better understand
whether, when, and how to contact that customer. Although Microsoft
must be careful to preserve consumer privacy—the company claims it
won’t purchase an individual’s income history—it can still provide
advertising clients with behavioral targeting information.

For example, Microsoft can help a DiningIn franchisee zero in on
working moms aged 30 to 40 in a given neighborhood with ads designed
to reach them before 10 AM when they’re most likely to be planning their
evening meal. Or if a person clicks on three Web sites related to auto insurance and then visits an unrelated site for sports or entertainment, auto insurance ads may show up on that site, in addition to the auto insurance
sites. This practice ensures that ads are readily apparent for a potential
customer likely to be in the market. Microsoft claims behavioral targeting
can increase the likelihood a visitor clicks an ad by as much as 76 percent.
Proponents of behavioral targeting maintain that consumers see
more relevant ads in this way. Because the ads are more effective as a
result, greater ad revenue is available to support free online content.
Spending on behavioral targeting is projected to grow to $4.4 billion or
8.6 percent of total online ad spending by 2012.
But consumers have significant misgivings about being tracked online
by advertisers. In one 2009 U.S. survey, about two-thirds of respondents
objected to the practice, including 55 percent of respondents aged 18 to 24.
Two-thirds of respondents also believed laws should give people the right to
know everything a Web site knows about them. Government regulators wonder whether industry self-regulation will be sufficient or legislation is needed.
Proponents of behavioral targeting maintain that many consumers lack
full understanding of different tracking practices and would be less concerned if they knew exactly how it worked. Their claims of anonymity and
privacy, however, have been weakened by events such as a leak at AOL of
online behavioral data in 2006 for 650,000 users and overly aggressive
attempts to institute data capture procedures at Facebook and various ISPs.
Sources: Elisabeth Sullivan, “Behave,” Marketing News, September 15, 2008,
pp. 12–15; Stephanie Clifford, “Two-Thirds of Americans Object to Online Tracking,”
New York Times, September 30, 2009; Jessica Mintz, “Microsoft Adds Behavioral
Targeting,” Associated Press, December 28, 2006; Becky Ebenkamp, “Behavior
Issues,” Brandweek, October 20, 2008, pp. 21–25; Brian Morrissey, “Connect the
Thoughts,” Adweek Media, June 29, 2009, pp. 10–11; Laurie Birkett, “The Cookie
That Won’t Crumble,” Forbes, January 18, 2010, p. 32; Alden M. Hayashi, “How Not
to Market on the Web,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Winter 2010), pp. 14–15.

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

| CHAPTER 5

147

Summary
1. Customers are value maximizers. They form an expectation of value and act on it. Buyers will buy from the
firm that they perceive to offer the highest customerdelivered value, defined as the difference between total
customer benefits and total customer cost.
2. A buyer’s satisfaction is a function of the product’s perceived performance and the buyer’s expectations.
Recognizing that high satisfaction leads to high customer loyalty, companies must ensure that they meet
and exceed customer expectations.
3. Losing profitable customers can dramatically affect a
firm’s profits. The cost of attracting a new customer is
estimated to be five times the cost of keeping a current
customer happy. The key to retaining customers is relationship marketing.
4. Quality is the totality of features and characteristics of a
product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy

stated or implied needs. Marketers play a key role in
achieving high levels of total quality so that firms remain
solvent and profitable.
5. Marketing managers must calculate customer lifetime
values of their customer base to understand their profit
implications. They must also determine ways to increase the value of the customer base.
6. Companies are also becoming skilled in customer
relationship management (CRM), which focuses on
developing programs to attract and retain the right
customers and meeting the individual needs of those
valued customers.
7. Customer relationship management often requires
building a customer database and data mining to detect trends, segments, and individual needs. A number
of significant risks also exist, so marketers must proceed thoughtfully.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Online versus Offline Privacy

Marketing Discussion
Using CLV

As more firms practice relationship marketing and develop customer databases, privacy issues are emerging as an important
topic. Consumers and public interest groups are scrutinizing—
and sometimes criticizing—the privacy policies of firms and
raising concerns about potential theft of online credit card information or other potentially sensitive or confidential financial information. Others maintain online privacy fears are unfounded
and that security issues are as much a concern offline. They argue that the opportunity to steal information exists virtually
everywhere, and it’s up to consumers to protect their interests.
Take a position: Privacy is a bigger issue online than
offline versus Privacy is no different online than offline.

Consider customer lifetime value (CLV). Choose a business
and show how you would go about developing a quantitative formulation that captures the concept. How would that
business change if it totally embraced the customer equity
concept and maximized CLV?

Marketing Excellence

>>Nordstrom
Nordstrom is an upscale U.S. department store chain with
sales that topped $8 billion in 2009. John W. Nordstrom
originally started the company as a shoe store but grew it
over the years into a fashion specialty chain store selling
top-quality, brand-name clothing, accessories, jewelry,
cosmetics, and fragrances.
From the beginning, Nordstrom has believed in and
stressed the importance of providing the highest level of

customer service possible along with top-of-the-line,
high-quality merchandise. As a shoe retailer, the company
offered a wide range of products to fit most everyone’s
needs and price point. As it expanded into fashion and
apparel, it maintained these goals.
Today, Nordstrom sets the standard in customer service and loyalty. In fact, the company is so well-known for
this trait that urban legends of unusual acts of customer
service still circulate today. One of the best-known tells
how in 1975 a customer came into a Nordstrom store after Nordstrom had purchased a company called Northern
Commercial Company. The customer wanted to return a

148

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

set of tires originally bought
at Northern Commercial. Although Nordstrom has
never carried or sold tires, it happily accepted the return
and instantly provided the customer cash for his purchase.
While Nordstrom’s “no questions asked” return policy
remains intact today, there are many other examples of its
exceptional customer service. Its sales representatives send
thank-you cards to customers who shop there and have
hand-delivered special orders to customers’ homes.
Nordstrom installed a tool called Personal Book at its registers that allow salespeople to enter and recall customers’
specific preferences in order to better personalize their
shopping experiences. Nordstrom also provides customers
with multichannels for shopping, allowing them to buy
something online and pick it up at a store within an hour.
Nordstrom’s customer loyalty program, Fashion
Rewards Program, rewards customers on four different levels based on their annual spending. Customers who spend
$10,000 annually receive complimentary alterations, free
shipping, a 24-hour fashion emergency hotline, and access
to a personal concierge service. Customers at the highest
rewards level ($20,000 spent annually) also receive private

Marketing Excellence

>>Tesco
If you asked a customer of UK supermarket chain Tesco
what the shopping experience there was like in the early
1980s, “customer friendly” would probably not be the answer. Though it began upgrading its stores and product selection in 1983, Tesco continued to suffer from a reputation
as a “pile it high and sell it cheap” mass market retailer, lagging behind Sainsbury’s, the more upscale market leader.
To gain share against Sainsbury’s, Tesco needed to reverse
the public perception of its stores. It decided to improve the
shopping experience and highlight improvements with an
image campaign to “lift us out of the mold in our particular
sector,” as its 1989 agency brief put it.
Between 1990 and 1992, Tesco launched 114 separate
initiatives to improve the quality of its stores, including adding

shopping trips complete with prestocked dressing rooms
in the customers’ specific size, champagne, and live piano
music; tickets to Nordstrom’s runway fashion shows; and
access to exclusive travel and fashion packages, including
red carpet events.
This strategic and often costly customer-focus approach has reaped great benefits for the company. Not
only has Nordstrom emerged over the past 100+ years as
a luxury brand known for quality, trust, and service, but its
customers stay loyal even in hard times. During the economic crisis in 2008 and 2009, many customers chose to
shop at Nordstrom over its competitors due to their existing relationship and hassle-free return policy.
Nordstrom currently operates 112 full-line stores, 69
Nordstrom Rack clearance stores, two Jeffrey Boutiques,
and one clearance store, with plans to open 50 new
stores over the next 10 years. When a new store opens,
Nordstrom connects with the surrounding community by
hosting an opening night gala complete with live entertainment, a runway fashion show, and the ultimate shopping experience to help raise money for local charities.
As Nordstrom moves forward, the company continues
to be flexible and look for new tools and means to help
deepen and develop its customer-salesperson relationship.
Questions
1. How else can Nordstrom continue to provide exceptional customer service and increase brand loyalty?
2. What are Nordstrom’s greatest risks, and who are its
biggest competitors?
Sources: “Annual Reports,” Nordstrom.com; “Company History,” Nordstrom.com; Chantal Todé,
“Nordstrom Loyalty Program Experience,” DMNews, May 4, 2007; Melissa Allison and Amy
Martinez, “Nordstrom’s Solid December Showing Suggests Some Shoppers Eager to Spend.”
Seattle Times, January 7, 2010.

baby-changing rooms, stocking specialty items such as
French free-range chickens, and introducing a value-priced
line of products. It developed a campaign entitled “Every
Little Helps” to communicate these improvements with
20 ads, each focused on a different aspect of its approach:
“doing right by the customer.” As a result, between 1990
and 1995, Tesco attracted 1.3 million new customers, who
helped increase revenues and market share until Tesco
surpassed Sainsbury’s as the market leader in 1995.
Tesco then introduced an initiative that would make it a
world-class example of how to build lasting relationships
with customers: the Tesco Clubcard frequent-shopper program. The Clubcard not only offered discounts and special
offers tailored to individual shoppers but also acted as a
powerful data-gathering tool, enabling Tesco to understand
the shopping patterns and preferences of its customers
better than any competitor could. Using Clubcard data,
Tesco created a unique “DNA profile” for each customer

CREATING LONG-TERM LOYALTY RELATIONSHIPS

based
on
shopping habits. To build this profile, it
classified each product purchased by a customer on a set
of up to 40 dimensions, including price, size, brand, ecofriendliness, convenience, and healthiness. Based on their
DNA profile, Tesco shoppers received one of 4 million different variations of the quarterly Clubcard statement, which
contained targeted special offers and other promotions.
The company also installed kiosks in its stores where
Clubcard shoppers could get customized coupons.
The Clubcard data helped Tesco run its business more
efficiently. Tracking Clubcard purchases helped uncover each
product’s price elasticity and helped set promotional schedules, which saved Tesco over $500 million. Tesco used its
customer data to determine the range of products and the
nature of merchandising for each store, and even the location
of new stores. Within 15 months of introduction, more than
8 million Clubcards had been issued, of which 5 million were
used regularly. Tesco’s customer focus strategies enhanced
by the Clubcard helped propel Tesco to even greater success
than in the early 1990s. The company’s market share in the
United Kingdom rose to 15 percent by 1999, and that year
other British companies voted Tesco Britain’s most admired
company for the second year in a row.
In the following years, Tesco continued to apply its winning formula of using customer data to dominate the British
retail landscape. Tesco moved beyond supermarkets to “bigbox” retailing of general merchandise, or nonfood products.
This strategic growth not only provided additional convenience to consumers who preferred shopping under one roof
but also improved overall profitability. In 2003, the average
profit margin was 9 percent for nonfood products versus
5 percent for food and nearly 20 percent of Tesco’s revenues
came from nonfood items. That year, the company sold more
CDs than Virgin Megastores and its apparel line, Cherokee,
was the fastest-growing brand in the United Kingdom.
Tesco continued to conduct extensive customer
research with telephone, written surveys, and customer panels to extend its lead in the grocery market. By 2005, the
company had a 35 percent share of supermarket spending in
the United Kingdom, almost twice that of its nearest competitor, and a 14 percent share of total retail sales. Tesco sought
growth overseas in the mid-2000s and today, the company

| CHAPTER 5

149

operates 4,300 stores in 14 countries, with a strong focus on
high-growth markets in Asia. The company has used the
same customer-centered strategies that worked in the United
Kingdom to expand into these new markets.
Tesco continues to diversify its product and service offerings in order to reach more consumers. In the late 1990s,
Tesco launched its own ISP service, Tesco Broadband, to
provide Internet access to homes and businesses. During
the 2000s, the company partnered with existing telecoms
to create Tesco Mobile and Tesco Home Phone, a service
now used by over 2 million UK residents. Recently, Tesco
joined forces with the Royal Bank of Scotland to create a
banking division, Tesco Bank. In addition, Tesco offers insurance policies, dental plans, music downloads, and financial services. One Citigroup analyst said the chain had,
“pulled off a trick that I’m not aware of any other retailer
achieving. That is to appeal to all segments of the market.”
Tesco has accomplished this feat by creating three distinctive Tesco-branded price ranges in order to appeal to everyone: “Finest,” “Mid-range,” and “Value.” In addition, Tesco
has categorized its stores into six different formats, depending on where they are located and whom they are targeting.
From largest to smallest, these stores include Tesco Extra,
Tesco Superstores, Tesco Metro, Tesco Express, One Stop,
and Tesco Homeplus.
Throughout Tesco’s massive expansion, both globally
and through its product and service offerings, Tesco has
stayed true to the importance of its Clubcard loyalty program. Consumers can now earn points on their Clubcard
every time they shop at a Tesco store, use one of Tesco’s
services (Tesco Mobile, Tesco Home Phone, Tesco
Broadband, Tesco Credit Card, or Tesco Financial), or use
one of Tesco’s partners’ services. During the recent worldwide recession, Tesco helped trigger spending through special loyalty promotions such as double reward points.
During a double points promotion, consumers receive 2
points for every £1 spent. For every 100 points, consumers
receive a £1 voucher good for any Tesco product or service.
In 2009, Tesco’s profits reached £3 billion, which
resulted in £59 billion in revenues. Today, it is the largest
British retailer measured by both sales and market share
(30 percent). Based on profit, it is the second largest
retailer in the world after Walmart.
Questions
1. What’s next for Tesco? Where and how can it grow?
Who will it target?
2. How can Tesco take its customer loyalty programs to
the next level?
Sources: Richard Fletcher, “Leahy Shrugs Off Talk of a ‘Brain Drain,’” Sunday Times (London),
January 29, 2006; Elizabeth Rigby, “Prosperous Tesco Takes Retailing to a New Level,” Financial
Times, September 21, 2005, p. 23; Laura Cohn, “A Grocery War That’s Not about Food,”
BusinessWeek, October 20, 2003, p. 30; “The Prime Minister Launches the 10th Tesco Computers
for Schools Scheme,” M2 Presswire, January 26, 2001; Ashleye Sharpe and Joanna Bamford,
“Tesco Stores Ltd,” paper presented at Advertising Effectiveness Awards, 2000; Hamish Pringle
and Marjorie Thompson, Brand Spirit (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999); Hannah Liptrot, “Tesco:
Supermarket Superpower,” BBC, June 3, 2005.

150

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How do consumer
characteristics influence
buying behavior?
2. What major psychological
processes influence consumer
responses to the marketing
program?
3. How do consumers make
purchasing decisions?
4. In what ways do consumers
stray from a deliberative,
rational decision
process?
LEGO has programs in place to help it stay
close to its customers—especially the
more devoted and loyal ones.

6

Analyzing Consumer
Markets
The aim of marketing is to meet and satisfy target customers’ needs and
wants better than competitors. Marketers must have a thorough understanding of how consumers think, feel, and act and offer clear value to each and every target consumer.

LEGO of Billund, Denmark, may have been one of the first mass customized brands.
Every child who has ever had a set of the most basic LEGO blocks has built his or her
own unique and amazing creations, brick by plastic brick. When LEGO decided to
become a lifestyle brand and launch theme parks; its own lines of clothes, watches, and
video games; and products such as Clikits craft sets designed to attract more girls to the
brand franchise, it neglected its core market of five- to nine-year-old boys. Plunging profits led to
layoffs of almost half its employees as the firm streamlined its brand portfolio to emphasize its core
businesses. To better coordinate new product activities, LEGO revamped its organizational structure
into four functional groups managing eight key areas. One group was responsible for supporting
customer communities and tapping into them for product ideas. LEGO
also set up what was later renamed LEGO Design byME, which let
Successful marketing requires that companies
customers design, share, and build their own custom LEGO products fully connect with their customers. Adopting a holistic
using LEGO’s freely downloadable Digital Designer 3.0 software. The marketing orientation means understanding customers—
creations that result can exist—and be shared with other enthusiasts— gaining a 360-degree view of both their daily lives and the
solely online, or, if customers want to build them, the software tabulates changes that occur during their lifetimes so the right products
the pieces required and sends an order to LEGO’s Enfield, Connecticut, are always marketed to the right customers in the right way.
warehouse. Customers can request step-by-step building guide instruc- This chapter explores individual consumer buying dynamics; the
next chapter explores the buying dynamics of business buyers.
tions and even design their own box to store the pieces.1

What Influences Consumer
Behavior?
Consumer behavior is the study of how individuals, groups, and organizations select, buy, use, and
dispose of goods, services, ideas, or experiences to satisfy their needs and wants.2 Marketers must
fully understand both the theory and reality of consumer behavior.
Table 6.1 provides a snapshot profile of U.S. consumers.
A consumer’s buying behavior is influenced by cultural, social, and personal factors. Of these,
cultural factors exert the broadest and deepest influence.

Cultural Factors
Culture, subculture, and social class are particularly important influences on consumer buying behavior. Culture is the fundamental determinant of a person’s wants and behavior. Through family
and other key institutions, a child growing up in the United States is exposed to values such as
151

152

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

TABLE 6.1

American Consumer Almanac

Expenditures
Average U.S. outlays for goods and services in 2009
$

%

Housing

$16,920

34.1%

Transportation

$8,758

17.6%

Food

$6,133

12.4%

Personal insurance and pensions

$5,336

10.7%

Healthcare

$2,853

5.7%

Entertainment

$2,698

5.4%

Apparel and services

$1,881

3.8%

Cash contributions

$1,821

3.7%

Education

$945

1.9%

Miscellaneous

$808

1.6%

Personal care products and services

$588

1.2%

Alcoholic beverages

$457

.9%

Tobacco products and smoking supplies

$323

0.7%

Reading

$118

0.2%

Ownership
Percentage of households with at least one vehicle owned or leased

77.0%

Percentage of households that own homes

67%

Percentage of households that own their homes “free and clear”

23%

Time use on an average workday for employed persons
ages 25–54 with children in 2008
Working and related activities

8.8 hours

Sleeping

7.6 hours

Leisure and sports

2.6 hours

Caring for others

1.3 hours

Eating and drinking

1.0 hours

Household activities

1.0 hours

Other

1.7 hours

Monthly users’ time spent in hours: Minutes per user aged 2+ years—Q1 2009
# of Americans

Average minutes
per day spent

Watching TV in the home

285,574,000

153 minutes

Watching time-shifted TV

79,533,000

8 minutes

Using the Internet

163,110,000

29 minutes

Watching video on the Internet

131,102,000

3 minutes

Mobile subscribers watching video on a mobile phone

13,419,000

4 minutes

Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Expenditure Survey, www.bls.gov/cex; AC Nielsen, A2 M2 Three Screen Report, 1st Quarter 2009, http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-content/
uploads/2009/05/nielsen_threescreenreport_q109.pdf.

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

achievement and success, activity, efficiency and practicality, progress, material comfort, individualism, freedom, external comfort, humanitarianism, and youthfulness.3 A child growing up in
another country might have a different view of self, relationship to others, and rituals. Marketers
must closely attend to cultural values in every country to understand how to best market their
existing products and find opportunities for new products.
Each culture consists of smaller subcultures that provide more specific identification and
socialization for their members. Subcultures include nationalities, religions, racial groups, and
geographic regions. When subcultures grow large and affluent enough, companies often design
specialized marketing programs to serve them.
Virtually all human societies exhibit social stratification, most often in the form of social classes,
relatively homogeneous and enduring divisions in a society, hierarchically ordered and with
members who share similar values, interests, and behavior. One classic depiction of social classes in
the United States defined seven ascending levels: (1) lower lowers, (2) upper lowers, (3) working
class, (4) middle class, (5) upper middles, (6) lower uppers, and (7) upper uppers.4
Social class members show distinct product and brand preferences in many areas, including
clothing, home furnishings, leisure activities, and automobiles. They also differ in media preferences; upper-class consumers often prefer magazines and books, and lower-class consumers often
prefer television. Even within a category such as TV, upper-class consumers may show greater
preference for news and drama, whereas lower-class consumers may lean toward reality shows and
sports. There are also language differences—advertising copy and dialogue must ring true to the
targeted social class.

Social Factors
In addition to cultural factors, social factors such as reference groups, family, and social roles and
statuses affect our buying behavior.

REFERENCE GROUPS A person’s reference groups are all the groups that have a direct (faceto-face) or indirect influence on their attitudes or behavior. Groups having a direct influence are
called membership groups. Some of these are primary groups with whom the person interacts
fairly continuously and informally, such as family, friends, neighbors, and coworkers. People also
belong to secondary groups, such as religious, professional, and trade-union groups, which tend to
be more formal and require less continuous interaction.
Reference groups influence members in at least three ways. They expose an individual to new
behaviors and lifestyles, they influence attitudes and self-concept, and they create pressures for
conformity that may affect product and brand choices. People are also influenced by groups to
which they do not belong. Aspirational groups are those a person hopes to join; dissociative
groups are those whose values or behavior an individual rejects.
Where reference group influence is strong, marketers must determine how to reach and influence the group’s opinion leaders. An opinion leader is the person who offers informal advice or
information about a specific product or product category, such as which of several brands is best or
how a particular product may be used.5 Opinion leaders are often highly confident, socially active,
and frequent users of the category. Marketers try to reach them by identifying their demographic
and psychographic characteristics, identifying the media they read, and directing messages to them.
Clothing companies such as Hot Topic, which hope to appeal to the fickle and fashionconscious youth market, have used music in a concerted effort to monitor opinion leaders’ style
and behavior.

Hot Topic With over 600 stores in malls in 49 states and Puerto Rico, Hot Topic
has been hugely successful at using anti-establishment style in its fashions. The chain also
sells books, comics, jewelry, CDs, records, posters, and other paraphernalia. Hot Topic’s slogan,
“Everything about the music,” reflects its operating premise: Whether a teen is into rock,
pop-punk, emo, acid rap, rave, or rockabilly—or even more obscure musical tastes—Hot
Topic has the right T-shirt. To keep up with music trends, all Hot Topic staffers, from the CEO to the musicobsessed salespeople (80 percent of whom are under 25), regularly attend concerts by up-and-coming
and established bands to scout who’s wearing what. Each store looks more like a campus student center

| CHAPTER 6

153

154

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

than a shop—loud music plays and dark walls have bulletin boards
displaying concert flyers and staff music picks. Hot Topic also hosts free
acoustic shows, called Local Static, showcasing local bands and has
created a music-related social network site, ShockHound.com. Hot Topic
can catch trends and launch new hip clothing and hard-to-find pop culture
merchandise in six to eight weeks, literally months before traditional
competitors using off-shore suppliers.6

Hot Topic works hard to stay on
top of what’s new and what
matters with its core youth
audience—especially in music.

FAMILY The family is the most important consumer buying
organization in society, and family members constitute the most
influential primary reference group.7 There are two families in the
buyer’s life. The family of orientation consists of parents and
siblings. From parents a person acquires an orientation toward
religion, politics, and economics and a sense of personal ambition,
self-worth, and love.8 Even if the buyer no longer interacts very
much with his or her parents, parental influence on behavior can be
significant. Almost 40 percent of families have auto insurance with the same company as the
husband’s parents.
A more direct influence on everyday buying behavior is the family of procreation—namely, the
person’s spouse and children. In the United States, husband–wife engagement in purchases has
traditionally varied widely by product category. The wife has usually acted as the family’s main purchasing agent, especially for food, sundries, and staple clothing items. Now traditional purchasing
roles are changing, and marketers would be wise to see both men and women as possible targets.
For expensive products and services such as cars, vacations, or housing, the vast majority of husbands and wives engage in joint decision making.9 Men and women may respond differently to
marketing messages, however.10 Research has shown that women value connections and relationships with family and friends and place a higher priority on people than on companies. Men, on the
other hand, relate more to competition and place a high priority on action.11
Marketers are taking more direct aim at women with new products such as Quaker’s Nutrition
for Women cereals and Crest Rejuvenating Effects toothpaste. In 2003, Sherwin-Williams launched
a Dutch Boy easy-to-use “Twist and Pour” paint can targeted specifically at women. Priced $2
higher than the same paint in traditional metal containers, the new product helped the company
triple its revenue.12
Another shift in buying patterns is an increase in the amount of dollars spent and the direct and
indirect influence wielded by children and teens. Direct influence describes children’s hints,
requests, and demands—“I want to go to McDonald’s.” Indirect influence means that parents know
the brands, product choices, and preferences of their children without hints or outright requests
(“I think Jake and Emma would want to go to McDonald’s”).
Research has shown that more than two-thirds of 13- to 21-year-olds make or influence family
purchase decisions on audio/video equipment, software, and vacation destinations.13 In total, these
teens and young adults spend over $120 billion a year. They report that to make sure they buy the
right products, they watch what their friends say and do as much as what they see or hear in an ad
or are told by a salesperson in a store.14
Television can be especially powerful in reaching children, and marketers are using it to target
them at younger ages than ever before with product tie-ins for just about everything—Disney character pajamas, retro G.I. Joe toys and action figures, Harry Potter backpacks, and High School
Musical playsets.
By the time children are around 2 years old, they can often recognize characters, logos, and
specific brands. They can distinguish between advertising and programming by about ages 6 or 7.
A year or so later, they can understand the concept of persuasive intent on the part of advertisers.
By 9 or 10, they can perceive the discrepancies between message and product.15
ROLES AND STATUS We each participate in many groups—family, clubs, organizations.
Groups often are an important source of information and help to define norms for behavior.
We can define a person’s position in each group in terms of role and status. A role consists of the
activities a person is expected to perform. Each role in turn connotes a status. A senior vice

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

155

marketing
The Average U.S. Consumer Quiz

Memo

Listed below is a series of statements used in attitude surveys of U.S. consumers. For each statement, estimate what percent of U.S. men and women
agreed with it in 2009 and write your answer, a number between 0 percent

and 100 percent, in the columns to the right. Then check your results
against the correct answers in the footnote.*

Percent of Consumers Agreeing
Statements

% Men

% Women

1. It’s more important to fit in than to be different from other people.
2. Material things like the car I drive and the house I live in are really important to me.
3. Religion doesn’t provide the answers to many of today’s problems.
4. Businesses care more about selling me products and services that already exist rather than coming

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____

up with something that really fits my lifestyle.

5. Most of the time, the service people that I deal with don’t care much about me or my needs.
6. I wish there were clearer rules about what is right and wrong.
7. I am comfortable with a certain amount of debt.
8. It is risky to buy a brand you are not familiar with.
9. I try to have as much fun as I can now and let the future take care of itself.
10. No matter how hard I try, I never seem to have enough time to do all the things I need to do.
Note:
Results are from a nationally representative sample of 4,147 respondents surveyed in 2009.
Source: The Futures Company Yankelovich MONITOR (with permission). Copyright 2009, Yankelovich, Inc.
*Answers:

1. M = 27%, W = 20%; 2. M = 47%, W = 39%; 3. M = 53%, W = 45%; 4. M = 72%, W = 66%; 5. M = 60%, W = 57%; 6. M = 47%, W = 45%; 7. M = 54%,
W = 46%; 8. M = 49%, W = 46%; 9. M = 56%, W = 46%; 10. M = 63%, W = 69%
Source: The Futures Company/Yankelovich Monitor. Copyright 2009, Yankelovich, Inc.

president of marketing may be seen as having more status than a sales manager, and a sales
manager may be seen as having more status than an office clerk. People choose products that reflect
and communicate their role and their actual or desired status in society. Marketers must be aware
of the status-symbol potential of products and brands.

Personal Factors
Personal characteristics that influence a buyer’s decision include age and stage in the life cycle,
occupation and economic circumstances, personality and self-concept, and lifestyle and values.
Because many of these have a direct impact on consumer behavior, it is important for marketers
to follow them closely. See how well you do with “Marketing Memo: The Average U.S.
Consumer Quiz.”

AGE AND STAGE IN THE LIFE CYCLE Our taste in food, clothes, furniture, and recreation
is often related to our age. Consumption is also shaped by the family life cycle and the number, age,
and gender of people in the household at any point in time. U.S. households are increasingly
fragmented—the traditional family of four with a husband, wife, and two kids makes up a much
smaller percentage of total households than it once did. The average U.S. household size in 2008
was 2.6 persons.16
In addition, psychological life-cycle stages may matter. Adults experience certain “passages” or
“transformations” as they go through life.17 Their behavior as they go through these passages, such
as becoming a parent, is not necessarily fixed but changes with the times.

156

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Marketers should also consider critical life events or transitions—marriage, childbirth, illness,
relocation, divorce, first job, career change, retirement, death of a spouse—as giving rise to new
needs. These should alert service providers—banks, lawyers, and marriage, employment, and
bereavement counselors—to ways they can help. For example, the wedding industry attracts
marketers of a whole host of products and services.

Newlyweds Newlyweds in the United States spend a total of about $70 billion on
their households in the first year after marriage—and they buy more in the first six months than
an established household does in five years! Marketers know marriage often means two sets of
shopping habits and brand preferences must be blended into one. Procter & Gamble, Clorox,
and Colgate-Palmolive include their products in “Newlywed Kits,” distributed when couples
apply for a marriage license. JCPenney has identified “Starting Outs” as one of its two major
customer groups. Marketers pay a premium for name lists to assist their direct marketing
because, as one noted, newlywed names “are like gold.”18

OCCUPATION AND ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES Occupation

One well-defined and attractive
target market for many firms is
newlyweds.

also influences consumption patterns. Marketers try to identify the occupational
groups that have above-average interest in their products and services and even
tailor products for certain occupational groups: Computer software companies,
for example, design different products for brand managers, engineers, lawyers,
and physicians.
As the recent recession clearly indicated, both product and brand choice are
greatly affected by economic circumstances: spendable income (level, stability,
and time pattern), savings and assets (including the percentage that is liquid),
debts, borrowing power, and attitudes toward spending and saving. Luxury-goods
makers such as Gucci, Prada, and Burberry are vulnerable to an economic downturn. If economic indicators point to a recession, marketers can take steps to
redesign, reposition, and reprice their products or introduce or increase the
emphasis on discount brands so they can continue to offer value to target customers. Some
firms—such as Snap Fitness—are well-positioned to take advantage of good and bad economic
times to begin with.

Snap Fitness

Although some gym chains struggled in the recession—
Bally’s Total Fitness filed for bankruptcy twice—24-hour Snap Fitness actually expanded
the number of its clubs, and its revenue doubled. The franchise chain did all this despite
charging members only $35 per month with easy cancellation fees. Its secret?
A no-frills approach reinforced by the motto, “Fast, Convenient, Affordable.” The
small gyms—only 2,500 square feet—typically have five treadmills, two stationary bikes, five elliptical machines, and weight equipment. What’s important is what
they don’t have—no classes, spa rooms, on-site child care, or juice bars. Few
clubs have showers, and most are staffed only 25 to 40 hours a week. The sweet
spot of their target market is married 35- to 55-year-olds with kids who live
nearby and are busy enough that they cannot afford more than an hour a day to go
to the gym.19

PERSONALITY AND SELF-CONCEPT Each person has personality
No-frills Snap Fitness was
perfectly positioned to weather
the latest economic recession.

characteristics that influence his or her buying behavior. By personality, we
mean a set of distinguishing human psychological traits that lead to
relatively consistent and enduring responses to environmental stimuli
(including buying behavior). We often describe personality in terms of such traits as selfconfidence, dominance, autonomy, deference, sociability, defensiveness, and adaptability.20

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

Personality can be a useful variable in analyzing consumer brand choices. Brands also have
personalities, and consumers are likely to choose brands whose personalities match their own.
We define brand personality as the specific mix of human traits that we can attribute to a
particular brand.
Stanford’s Jennifer Aaker researched brand personalities and identified the following traits:21
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sincerity (down-to-earth, honest, wholesome, and cheerful)
Excitement (daring, spirited, imaginative, and up-to-date)
Competence (reliable, intelligent, and successful)
Sophistication (upper-class and charming)
Ruggedness (outdoorsy and tough)

Aaker analyzed some well-known brands and found that a number tended to be strong on one
particular trait: Levi’s on “ruggedness”; MTV on “excitement”; CNN on “competence”; and
Campbell’s on “sincerity.” These brands will, in theory, attract users high on the same traits. A brand
personality may have several attributes: Levi’s suggests a personality that is also youthful, rebellious,
authentic, and American.
A cross-cultural study exploring the generalizability of Aaker’s scale outside the United States
found three of the five factors applied in Japan and Spain, but a “peacefulness” dimension replaced
“ruggedness” both in Japan and Spain, and a “passion” dimension emerged in Spain instead of
“competence.”22 Research on brand personality in Korea revealed two culture-specific factors—
“passive likeableness” and “ascendancy”—reflecting the importance of Confucian values in Korea’s
social and economic systems.23
Consumers often choose and use brands with a brand personality consistent with their actual
self-concept (how we view ourselves), although the match may instead be based on the consumer’s ideal self-concept (how we would like to view ourselves) or even on others’ self-concept
(how we think others see us).24 These effects may also be more pronounced for publicly consumed products than for privately consumed goods.25 On the other hand, consumers who are
high “self-monitors”—that is, sensitive to how others see them—are more likely to choose
brands whose personalities fit the consumption situation.26 Finally, often consumers have multiple aspects of self (serious professional, caring family member, active fun-lover) that may be
evoked differently in different situations or around different types of people. Some marketers
carefully orchestrate brand experiences to express brand personalities. Here’s how San
Francisco’s Joie de Vivre chain does this.27

Joie de Vivre

Joie de Vivre Hospitality operates a chain of boutique hotels,
restaurants, and resorts in the San Francisco area. Each property’s unique décor, quirky
amenities, and thematic style are often loosely based on popular magazines. For example, The
Hotel del Sol—a converted motel bearing a yellow exterior and surrounded by palm trees
wrapped with festive lights—is described as “kind of Martha Stewart Living meets Islands
magazine.” The Phoenix, represented by Rolling Stone, is, like the magazine, described as “adventurous,
hip, irreverent, funky, and young at heart.” Joie de Vivre’s goal is to stimulate each of the five senses in
accordance with the five words chosen for each hotel. The boutique concept enables the hotels to offer
personal touches, such as vitamins in place of chocolates on pillows. There’s even an online personality
matchmaker to help match guests to the most fitting hotels. Joie de Vivre now owns the largest number of
independent hotel properties in the Bay Area.

LIFESTYLE AND VALUES People from the same subculture, social class, and occupation may
lead quite different lifestyles. A lifestyle is a person’s pattern of living in the world as expressed in
activities, interests, and opinions. It portrays the “whole person” interacting with his or her
environment. Marketers search for relationships between their products and lifestyle groups.
A computer manufacturer might find that most computer buyers are achievement-oriented and
then aim the brand more clearly at the achiever lifestyle. Here’s an example of one of the latest
lifestyle trends businesses are targeting.

| CHAPTER 6

157

158

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

LOHAS

Boutique hotel chain Joie de Vivre
uniquely positions each of its
properties and then offers an
online matchmaker to help
consumers find the hotel that
best fits their interests.

LOHAS Consumers who worry about the environment, want products to be pro-

duced in a sustainable way, and spend money to advance their personal health, development,
and potential have been named “LOHAS,” an acronym for lifestyles of health and sustainability.
One estimate placed 19 percent of the adults in the United States, or 41 million people, in the
LOHAS or “Cultural Creatives” category.28 The market for LOHAS products encompasses organic
foods, energy-efficient appliances and solar panels, alternative medicine, yoga tapes, and ecotourism. Taken
together, these account for an estimated $209 billion market.
Table 6.2 breaks the LOHAS demographic
into six segments with estimated size, and product and service interests.
Lifestyles are shaped partly by whether consumers are money constrained or time constrained.
Companies aiming to serve money-constrained consumers will create lower-cost products and
services. By appealing to thrifty consumers, Walmart has become the largest company in the world.
Its “everyday low prices” have wrung tens of billions of dollars out of the retail supply chain, passing the larger part of savings along to shoppers in the form of rock-bottom bargain prices.
Consumers who experience time famine are prone to multitasking, doing two or more things
at the same time. They will also pay others to perform tasks because time is more important to
them than money. Companies aiming to serve them will create convenient products and services
for this group.

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

TABLE 6.2

LOHAS Market Segments

Personal Health

Natural Lifestyles

Natural, organic products

Indoor & outdoor furnishings

Nutritional products

Organic cleaning supplies

Integrative health care

Compact fluorescent lights

Dietary supplements

Social change philanthropy

Mind body spirit products

Apparel

U.S. Market—$118.03 billion

U.S. Market—$10.6 billion

Green Building

Alternative Transportation

Home certification

Hybrid vehicles

Energy Star appliances

Biodiesel fuel

Sustainable flooring

Car sharing programs

Renewable energy systems

U.S. Market—$6.12 billion

Wood alternatives

U.S. Market—$50 billion
Eco-Tourism

Alternative Energy

Eco-tourism travel

Renewable energy credits

Eco-adventure travel

Green pricing

U.S. Market—$24.17 billion

U.S. Market—$380 million

Source: Reprinted by permission of LOHAS, http://www.lohas.com/.

Hamburger
Helper

In some categories, notably food processing, companies targeting time-constrained consumers
need to be aware that these very same people want to believe they’re not operating within time constraints. Marketers call those who seek both convenience and some involvement in the cooking
process the “convenience involvement segment.”29

Hamburger Helper Launched in 1971 in response to tough economic

times, the inexpensive pasta-and-powdered mix Hamburger Helper was designed to quickly and
inexpensively stretch a pound of meat into a family meal. With an estimated 44 percent of
evening meals prepared in under 30 minutes and strong competition from fast-food drivethrough windows, restaurant deliveries, and precooked grocery store dishes, Hamburger
Helper’s days of prosperity might seem numbered. Market researchers found, however, that some consumers
don’t want the fastest microwaveable solution possible—they also want to feel good about how they prepare
a meal. In fact, on average, they prefer to use at least one pot or pan and 15 minutes of time. To remain
attractive to this segment, marketers of Hamburger Helper are always introducing new flavors to tap into
changing consumer taste trends. Not surprisingly, the latest economic downturn saw sales of the brand rise
9 percent in 2009.30
Consumer decisions are also influenced by core values, the belief systems that underlie attitudes
and behaviors. Core values go much deeper than behavior or attitude and determine, at a basic
level, people’s choices and desires over the long term. Marketers who target consumers on the basis
of their values believe that with appeals to people’s inner selves, it is possible to influence their outer
selves—their purchase behavior.

| CHAPTER 6

159

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Key Psychological Processes
The starting point for understanding consumer behavior is the stimulus-response model shown
in
Figure 6.1. Marketing and environmental stimuli enter the consumer’s consciousness, and
a set of psychological processes combine with certain consumer characteristics to result in decision processes and purchase decisions. The marketer’s task is to understand what happens in the
consumer’s consciousness between the arrival of the outside marketing stimuli and the ultimate
purchase decisions. Four key psychological processes—motivation, perception, learning, and
memory—fundamentally influence consumer responses.31

Motivation: Freud, Maslow, Herzberg
We all have many needs at any given time. Some needs are biogenic; they arise from physiological
states of tension such as hunger, thirst, or discomfort. Other needs are psychogenic; they arise from
psychological states of tension such as the need for recognition, esteem, or belonging. A need
becomes a motive when it is aroused to a sufficient level of intensity to drive us to act. Motivation
has both direction—we select one goal over another—and intensity—we pursue the goal with
more or less vigor.
Three of the best-known theories of human motivation—those of Sigmund Freud, Abraham
Maslow, and Frederick Herzberg—carry quite different implications for consumer analysis and
marketing strategy.

FREUD’S THEORY Sigmund Freud assumed the psychological forces shaping people’s
behavior are largely unconscious, and that a person cannot fully understand his or her own
motivations. Someone who examines specific brands will react not only to their stated
capabilities, but also to other, less conscious cues such as shape, size, weight, material, color, and
brand name. A technique called laddering lets us trace a person’s motivations from the stated
instrumental ones to the more terminal ones. Then the marketer can decide at what level to
develop the message and appeal.32
Motivation researchers often collect in-depth interviews with a few dozen consumers to uncover
deeper motives triggered by a product. They use various projective techniques such as word association, sentence completion, picture interpretation, and role playing, many pioneered by Ernest
Dichter, a Viennese psychologist who settled in the United States.33
Today, motivational researchers continue the tradition of Freudian interpretation. Jan Callebaut
identifies different motives a product can satisfy. For example, whiskey can meet the need for social
relaxation, status, or fun. Different whiskey brands need to be motivationally positioned in one of
these three appeals.34 Another motivation researcher, Clotaire Rapaille, works on breaking the
“code” behind product behavior.35

Chrysler

When Chrysler decided to offer a new sedan, it had already done a great
deal of traditional market research that suggested U.S. consumers wanted excellent gas
mileage, safety, and prices. However, it was only through qualitative research that Chrysler
discovered what cultural anthropologist Clotaire Rapaille calls “the code”—the unconscious
meaning people give to a particular market offering. First, interviewers took on the role of “a
visitor from another planet,” asking participants to help them understand the product in question. Then,
participants told stories about the product, and finally, after a relaxation exercise, they wrote about their first
experiences with it. In this way, Chrysler learned that “cookie-cutter” sedans were “off-code,” and it used
information from the sessions to create the PT Cruiser. With its highly distinctive retro design, this sedan was
one of the most successful U.S. car launches in recent history.36
Chrysler

160

MASLOW’S THEORY Abraham Maslow sought to explain why people are driven by particular
needs at particular times.37 His answer is that human needs are arranged in a hierarchy from most to
least pressing—physiological needs, safety needs, social needs, esteem needs, and self-actualization

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

Products & services
Price
Distribution
Communications

Motivation
Perception
Learning
Memory

Other
Stimuli
Economic
Technological
Political
Cultural

Consumer
Characteristics
Cultural
Social
Personal

161

|Fig. 6.1|

Consumer
Psychology
Marketing
Stimuli

| CHAPTER 6

Buying
Decision Process

Purchase
Decision

Problem recognition
Information search
Evaluation of
alternatives
Purchase decision
Post-purchase
behavior

Product choice
Brand choice
Dealer choice
Purchase amount
Purchase timing
Payment method

Model of Consumer
Behavior

needs (see
Figure 6.2). People will try to satisfy their most important need first and then try to
satisfy the next most important. For example, a starving man (need 1) will not take an interest in the
latest happenings in the art world (need 5), nor in how he is viewed by others (need 3 or 4), nor even
in whether he is breathing clean air (need 2), but when he has enough food and water, the next most
important need will become salient.

HERZBERG’S THEORY Frederick Herzberg developed a two-factor theory that distinguishes
dissatisfiers (factors that cause dissatisfaction) from satisfiers (factors that cause satisfaction).38 The
absence of dissatisfiers is not enough to motivate a purchase; satisfiers must be present. For
example, a computer that does not come with a warranty would be a dissatisfier. Yet the presence of
a product warranty would not act as a satisfier or motivator of a purchase, because it is not a source
of intrinsic satisfaction. Ease of use would be a satisfier.
Herzberg’s theory has two implications. First, sellers should do their best to avoid dissatisfiers
(for example, a poor training manual or a poor service policy). Although these things will not sell a
product, they might easily unsell it. Second, the seller should identify the major satisfiers or motivators of purchase in the market and then supply them.

Perception
A motivated person is ready to act—how is influenced by his or her perception of the situation. In
marketing, perceptions are more important than reality, because perceptions affect consumers’
actual behavior. Perception is the process by which we select, organize, and interpret information

|Fig. 6.2|
5
Selfactualization
Needs
(self-development
and realization)

4

Esteem Needs
(self-esteem, recognition, status)

3

2

1

Social Needs
(sense of belonging, love)
Safety Needs
(security, protection)
Physiological Needs
(food, water, shelter)

Maslow’s Hierarchy
of Needs
Source: A. H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality,
3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1987).
Printed and electronically reproduced by permission
of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

162

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

inputs to create a meaningful picture of the world.39 It depends not only on physical stimuli, but
also on the stimuli’s relationship to the surrounding environment and on conditions within each of
us. One person might perceive a fast-talking salesperson as aggressive and insincere; another, as
intelligent and helpful. Each will respond to the salesperson differently.
People emerge with different perceptions of the same object because of three perceptual
processes: selective attention, selective distortion, and selective retention.

SELECTIVE ATTENTION Attention is the allocation of processing capacity to some stimulus.
Voluntary attention is something purposeful; involuntary attention is grabbed by someone or
something. It’s estimated that the average person may be exposed to over 1,500 ads or brand
communications a day. Because we cannot possibly attend to all these, we screen most stimuli
out—a process called selective attention. Selective attention means that marketers must work hard
to attract consumers’ notice. The real challenge is to explain which stimuli people will notice. Here
are some findings:
1.
2.
3.

People are more likely to notice stimuli that relate to a current need. A person who is motivated
to buy a computer will notice computer ads and be less likely to notice DVD ads.
People are more likely to notice stimuli they anticipate. You are more likely to notice computers
than radios in a computer store because you don’t expect the store to carry radios.
People are more likely to notice stimuli whose deviations are large in relationship to the normal
size of the stimuli. You are more likely to notice an ad offering $100 off the list price of a
computer than one offering $5 off.

Though we screen out much, we are influenced by unexpected stimuli, such as sudden offers in the
mail, over the phone, or from a salesperson. Marketers may attempt to promote their offers
intrusively in order to bypass selective attention filters.

SELECTIVE DISTORTION Even noticed stimuli don’t always come across in the way the
senders intended. Selective distortion is the tendency to interpret information in a way that fits
our preconceptions. Consumers will often distort information to be consistent with prior brand
and product beliefs and expectations.40
For a stark demonstration of the power of consumer brand beliefs, consider that in “blind”
taste tests, one group of consumers samples a product without knowing which brand it is, while
another group knows. Invariably, the groups have different opinions, despite consuming exactly
the same product.
When consumers report different opinions of branded and unbranded versions of identical
products, it must be the case that their brand and product beliefs, created by whatever means (past
experiences, marketing activity for the brand, or the like), have somehow changed their product
perceptions. We can find examples with virtually every type of product.41 When Coors changed its
label from “Banquet Beer” to “Original Draft,” consumers claimed the taste had changed even
though the formulation had not.
Selective distortion can work to the advantage of marketers with strong brands when consumers
distort neutral or ambiguous brand information to make it more positive. In other words, coffee
may seem to taste better, a car may seem to drive more smoothly, the wait in a bank line may seem
shorter, depending on the brand.
SELECTIVE RETENTION Most of us don’t remember much of the information to which we’re
exposed, but we do retain information that supports our attitudes and beliefs. Because of selective
retention, we’re likely to remember good points about a product we like and forget good points
about competing products. Selective retention again works to the advantage of strong brands. It
also explains why marketers need to use repetition—to make sure their message is not overlooked.
SUBLIMINAL PERCEPTION The selective perception mechanisms require consumers’ active
engagement and thought. A topic that has fascinated armchair marketers for ages is subliminal
perception. They argue that marketers embed covert, subliminal messages in ads or packaging.
Consumers are not consciously aware of them, yet they affect behavior. Although it’s clear that
mental processes include many subtle subconscious effects,42 no evidence supports the notion that
marketers can systematically control consumers at that level, especially enough to change
moderately important or strongly held beliefs.43

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

Learning
When we act, we learn. Learning induces changes in our behavior arising from experience. Most
human behavior is learned, although much learning is incidental. Learning theorists believe learning is produced through the interplay of drives, stimuli, cues, responses, and reinforcement. Two
popular approaches to learning are classical conditioning and operant (instrumental) conditioning.
A drive is a strong internal stimulus impelling action. Cues are minor stimuli that determine
when, where, and how a person responds. Suppose you buy an HP computer. If your experience is
rewarding, your response to computers and HP will be positively reinforced. Later, when you want
to buy a printer, you may assume that because it makes good computers, HP also makes good
printers. In other words, you generalize your response to similar stimuli. A countertendency to generalization is discrimination. Discrimination means we have learned to recognize differences in
sets of similar stimuli and can adjust our responses accordingly.
Learning theory teaches marketers that they can build demand for a product by associating it
with strong drives, using motivating cues, and providing positive reinforcement. A new company
can enter the market by appealing to the same drives competitors use and by providing similar
cues, because buyers are more likely to transfer loyalty to similar brands (generalization); or the
company might design its brand to appeal to a different set of drives and offer strong cue inducements to switch (discrimination).
Some researchers prefer more active, cognitive approaches when learning depends on the inferences or interpretations consumers make about outcomes (was an unfavorable consumer experience due to a bad product, or did the consumer fail to follow instructions properly?). The hedonic
bias occurs when people have a general tendency to attribute success to themselves and failure to
external causes. Consumers are thus more likely to blame a product than themselves, putting pressure on marketers to carefully explicate product functions in well-designed packaging and labels,
instructive ads and Web sites, and so on.

Emotions
Consumer response is not all cognitive and rational; much may be emotional and invoke different
kinds of feelings. A brand or product may make a consumer feel proud, excited, or confident. An ad
may create feelings of amusement, disgust, or wonder.
Here are two recent examples that recognize the power of emotions in consumer decision making.
•

•

For years, specialty foam mattress leader Tempur-Pedic famously used infomercials showing
that a wine glass on its mattress did not spill even as people bounced up and down on the bed.
To create a stronger emotional connection, the company began a broader-based media campaign in 2007 that positioned the mattresses as a wellness brand and “the nighttime therapy
for body and mind.”44
Reckitt Benckiser and Procter & Gamble launched advertising approaches in 2009 for Woolite
and Tide, respectively, that tapped not into the detergents’ performance benefits but into the
emotional connection—and challenges—of laundry. Based on research showing that one in
three working women recognize they ruined some of their clothes in the wash over the last
year, Reckitt Benckiser launched an online and in-store “Find the Look, Keep the Look” style
guide for Woolite for “finding fashion and keeping it looking fabulous without breaking the
bank.” Based on the premise that a detergent should do more than clean, P&G positioned new
Tide Total Care as preserving clothing and keeping the “7 signs of beautiful clothes,” including
shape, softness, and finish.45

Memory
Cognitive psychologists distinguish between short-term memory (STM)—a temporary and limited repository of information—and long-term memory (LTM)—a more permanent, essentially
unlimited repository. All the information and experiences we encounter as we go through life can
end up in our long-term memory.
Most widely accepted views of long-term memory structure assume we form some kind of associative model.46 For example, the associative network memory model views LTM as a set of nodes
and links. Nodes are stored information connected by links that vary in strength. Any type of information can be stored in the memory network, including verbal, visual, abstract, and contextual.

| CHAPTER 6

163

164

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Woolite’s style guide focuses on
the emotional benefits of choosing
and preserving the right look in
clothes for women.

A spreading activation process from node to node determines how much we retrieve and what information we can actually recall in any given situation. When a node becomes activated because
we’re encoding external information (when we read or hear a word or phrase) or retrieving internal information from LTM (when we think about some concept), other nodes are also activated if
they’re strongly enough associated with that node.
In this model, we can think of consumer brand knowledge as a node in memory with a variety
of linked associations. The strength and organization of these associations will be important
determinants of the information we can recall about the brand. Brand associations consist of all
brand-related thoughts, feelings, perceptions, images, experiences, beliefs, attitudes, and so on
that become linked to the brand node.
We can think of marketing as a way of making sure consumers have product and service experiences to create the right brand knowledge structures and maintain them in memory.
Companies such as Procter & Gamble like to create mental maps of consumers that depict their
knowledge of a particular brand in terms of the key associations likely to be triggered in a marketing setting, and their relative strength, favorability, and uniqueness to consumers.
Figure 6.3
displays a very simple mental map highlighting brand beliefs for a hypothetical consumer for
State Farm insurance.

|Fig. 6.3|

Hypothetical State
Farm Mental Map

STATE FARM
Auto
Life

Top-of-the-line insurance

Around a long time

Safe

Fire

INSURANCE

Conservative

Responsive

Good reputation

Convenient

Dependable

Reputable

Fast settlement

Reliable

Good home and auto
insurance

Personal service
Red color

“Good Neighbors”
Agents that are part
of my neighborhood

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

165

MEMORY PROCESSES Memory is a very constructive process, because we don’t remember
information and events completely and accurately. Often we remember bits and pieces and fill in
the rest based on whatever else we know. “Marketing Insight: Made to Stick” offers some practical
tips for how marketers can ensure their ideas—inside or outside the company—are remembered
and have impact.
Memory encoding describes how and where information gets into memory. The strength of the
resulting association depends on how much we process the information at encoding (how much we
think about it, for instance) and in what way.47 In general, the more attention we pay to the meaning of information during encoding, the stronger the resulting associations in memory will be.48
Advertising research in a field setting suggests that high levels of repetition for an uninvolving,
unpersuasive ad, for example, are unlikely to have as much sales impact as lower levels of repetition
for an involving, persuasive ad.49
Memory retrieval is the way information gets out of memory. Three facts are important about
memory retrieval.
1.

The presence of other product information in memory can produce interference effects and
cause us to either overlook or confuse new data. One marketing challenge in a category
crowded with many competitors—for example, airlines, financial services, and insurance
companies—is that consumers may mix up brands.

Credibility—give an idea believability. Indian overnight delivery
service Safexpress was able to overcome doubts about its
capabilities by describing to a Bollywood film studio how it had
flawlessly delivered 69,000 copies of the latest Harry Potter
novel to bookstores all over the country by 8 AM on the morning
of its release.
5. Emotion—help people see the importance of an idea. Research
on fact-based versus appeal-to-emotion antismoking ads has
demonstrated that emotional appeals are more compelling and
memorable.
6. Stories—empower people to use an idea through narrative.
Research again shows how narratives evoke mental stimulation,
and visualization of events makes recall and further learning easier.
The Heaths believe great ideas are made, not born, via these traits.
One example is the Subway ad campaign starring Jared—who lost
100 pounds in three months by eating two subs a day—that helped to
raise Subway’s sales 18 percent in one year. According to the Heaths,
the idea scores high on all six dimensions of stickiness.
4.

Marketing Insight
Made to Stick
Picking up on a concept first introduced by Malcolm Gladwell in his
Tipping Point book, brothers Chip and Dan Heath set out to uncover
what makes an idea sticky and catch on with an audience. Considering
a wide range of ideas from diverse sources—urban legends, conspiracy
theories, public policy mandates, and product design—they identified
six traits that characterize all great ideas and used the acronym
“SUCCES” to organize them:
1. Simple—find the core of any idea. Take an idea and distill it down,
whittling away everything that is not essential. “Southwest Airlines
is THE low-fare airline.”
2. Unexpected—grab people’s attention by surprising them.
Nordstrom’s customer service is legendary because it unexpectedly exceeds customer’s already high expectations by going
beyond helping them buy to address their personal situations—
ironing shirts before meetings, keeping cars warm while they shop,
or wrapping presents they actually bought at Macy’s.
3. Concrete—make sure any idea can be easily grasped and
remembered later. Boeing successfully designed the 727 airplane
by giving its thousands of engineers a very specific goal—the
plane had to seat 131 passengers, be able to fly nonstop from New
York to Miami, and land on runway 4-22 at LaGuardia, which could
not be used by large planes.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Simple—weight loss
Unexpected—weight loss by eating fast food
Concrete—weight loss by eating two Subway subs daily
Credibility—a documented loss of 100 pounds
Emotion—a triumph over difficult weight problems
Stories—a personal account of how eating two Subway Subs lead
to an incredible weight loss.

Sources: Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and
Others Die ... (New York: Random House, 2007); Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping
Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference (New York: Little, Brown and
Company, 2000); Barbara Kiviat, “Are You Sticky?” Time, October 29, 2006; Justin
Ewers, “Making It Stick,” U.S. News & World Report, January 21, 2007; Mike
Hofman, “Chip and Dan Heath: Marketing Made Sticky,” Inc, January 1, 2007.

166

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

TABLE 6.3

Understanding Consumer Behavior

Who buys our product or service?
Who makes the decision to buy the product?
Who influences the decision to buy the product?
How is the purchase decision made? Who assumes what role?
What does the customer buy? What needs must be satisfied?
Why do customers buy a particular brand?
Where do they go or look to buy the product or service?
When do they buy? Any seasonality factors?
How is our product perceived by customers?
What are customers’ attitudes toward our product?
What social factors might influence the purchase decision?
Do customers’ lifestyles influence their decisions?
How do personal or demographic factors influence the purchase decision?
Source: Based on figure 1.7 from George Belch and Michael Belch, Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications
Perspective, 8th ed. (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 2009).

2.

|Fig. 6.4|

Five-Stage Model of
the Consumer Buying
Process

3.

The time between exposure to information and encoding has been shown generally to
produce only gradual decay. Cognitive psychologists believe memory is extremely durable,
so once information becomes stored in memory, its strength of association decays
very slowly.50
Information may be available in memory but not be accessible for recall without the proper
retrieval cues or reminders. The effectiveness of retrieval cues is one reason marketing inside a
supermarket or any retail store is so critical—the actual product packaging, the use of in-store
mini-billboard displays, and so on. The information they contain and the reminders they
provide of advertising or other information already conveyed outside the store will be prime
determinants of consumer decision making.

Problem
recognition

Information
search

Evaluation
of alternatives

Purchase
decision

Postpurchase
behavior

The Buying Decision Process:
The Five-Stage Model
The basic psychological processes we’ve reviewed play an important role in consumers’ actual buying decisions.51
Table 6.3 provides a list of some key consumer behavior questions marketers
should ask in terms of who, what, when, where, how, and why.
Smart companies try to fully understand customers’ buying decision process—all the experiences in learning, choosing, using, and even disposing of a product.52 Marketing scholars have developed a “stage model” of the process (see
Figure 6.4). The consumer typically passes through
five stages: problem recognition, information search, evaluation of alternatives, purchase decision,
and postpurchase behavior. Clearly, the buying process starts long before the actual purchase and
has consequences long afterward.53
Consumers don’t always pass through all five stages—they may skip or reverse some. When you
buy your regular brand of toothpaste, you go directly from the need to the purchase decision, skipping information search and evaluation. The model in Figure 6.4 provides a good frame of reference, however, because it captures the full range of considerations that arise when a consumer faces
a highly involving new purchase.54 Later in the chapter, we will consider other ways consumers
make decisions that are less calculated.

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

167

Problem Recognition
The buying process starts when the buyer recognizes a problem or need triggered by internal or
external stimuli. With an internal stimulus, one of the person’s normal needs—hunger, thirst, sex—
rises to a threshold level and becomes a drive. A need can also be aroused by an external stimulus.
A person may admire a friend’s new car or see a television ad for a Hawaiian vacation, which
inspires thoughts about the possibility of making a purchase.
Marketers need to identify the circumstances that trigger a particular need by gathering information from a number of consumers. They can then develop marketing strategies that spark
consumer interest. Particularly for discretionary purchases such as luxury goods, vacation
packages, and entertainment options, marketers may need to increase consumer motivation so a
potential purchase gets serious consideration.

Information Search
Surprisingly, consumers often search for limited amounts of information. Surveys have shown
that for durables, half of all consumers look at only one store, and only 30 percent look at more
than one brand of appliances. We can distinguish between two levels of engagement in the
search. The milder search state is called heightened attention. At this level a person simply becomes more receptive to information about a product. At the next level, the person may enter an
active information search: looking for reading material, phoning friends, going online, and visiting stores to learn about the product.

INFORMATION SOURCES Major information sources to which consumers will turn fall
into four groups:
•
Personal. Family, friends, neighbors, acquaintances
•
Commercial. Advertising, Web sites, salespersons, dealers, packaging, displays
•
Public. Mass media, consumer-rating organizations
•
Experiential. Handling, examining, using the product
The relative amount and influence of these sources vary with the product category and the
buyer’s characteristics. Generally speaking, although consumers receive the greatest amount of
information about a product from commercial—that is, marketer-dominated—sources, the most
effective information often comes from personal or experiential sources, or public sources that are
independent authorities.
Each source performs a different function in influencing the buying decision. Commercial
sources normally perform an information function, whereas personal sources perform a legitimizing or evaluation function. For example, physicians often learn of new drugs from commercial
sources but turn to other doctors for evaluations.

SEARCH DYNAMICS By gathering information, the consumer learns about competing
brands and their features. The first box in
Figure 6.5 shows the total set of brands available.
The individual consumer will come to know a subset of these, the awareness set. Only some,
the consideration set, will meet initial buying criteria. As the consumer gathers more

Total Set

Awareness Set

Consideration Set

Apple
Dell
Hewlett-Packard
Toshiba
Compaq
NEC
.
.
.

Apple
Dell
Hewlett-Packard
Toshiba
Compaq

Apple
Dell
Toshiba

Choice Set
Apple
Dell

Decision

?

|Fig. 6.5|

Successive Sets
Involved in Consumer
Decision Making

168

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

information, just a few, the choice set, will remain strong contenders. The consumer makes a
final choice from these.55
Marketers need to identify the hierarchy of attributes that guide consumer decision making in
order to understand different competitive forces and how these various sets get formed. This
process of identifying the hierarchy is called market partitioning. Years ago, most car buyers first
decided on the manufacturer and then on one of its car divisions (brand-dominant hierarchy).
A buyer might favor General Motors cars and, within this set, Chevrolet. Today, many buyers decide
first on the nation from which they want to buy a car (nation-dominant hierarchy). Buyers may first
decide they want to buy a German car, then Audi, and then the A4 model of Audi.
The hierarchy of attributes also can reveal customer segments. Buyers who first decide on price are
price dominant; those who first decide on the type of car (sports, passenger, hybrid) are type dominant;
those who choose the brand first are brand dominant. Type/price/brand-dominant consumers make
up one segment; quality/service/type buyers make up another. Each may have distinct demographics,
psychographics, and mediagraphics and different awareness, consideration, and choice sets.56
Figure 6.5 makes it clear that a company must strategize to get its brand into the prospect’s
awareness, consideration, and choice sets. If a food store owner arranges yogurt first by brand (such
as Dannon and Yoplait) and then by flavor within each brand, consumers will tend to select their
flavors from the same brand. However, if all the strawberry yogurts are together, then all the vanilla,
and so forth, consumers will probably choose which flavors they want first, and then choose the
brand name they want for that particular flavor. Australian supermarkets arrange meats by the way
they might be cooked, and stores use more descriptive labels, such as “a 10-minute herbed beef
roast.” The result is that Australians buy a greater variety of meats than U.S. shoppers, who choose
from meats laid out by animal type—beef, chicken, pork, and so on.57
The company must also identify the other brands in the consumer’s choice set so that it can plan
the appropriate competitive appeals. In addition, marketers should identify the consumer’s information sources and evaluate their relative importance. Asking consumers how they first heard
about the brand, what information came later, and the relative importance of the different sources
will help the company prepare effective communications for the target market.

Evaluation of Alternatives
How does the consumer process competitive brand information and make a final value judgment?
No single process is used by all consumers, or by one consumer in all buying situations. There are
several processes, and the most current models see the consumer forming judgments largely on a
conscious and rational basis.
Some basic concepts will help us understand consumer evaluation processes: First, the consumer is trying to satisfy a need. Second, the consumer is looking for certain benefits from the
product solution. Third, the consumer sees each product as a bundle of attributes with varying
abilities to deliver the benefits. The attributes of interest to buyers vary by product—for example:
1.
2.
3.

Hotels—Location, cleanliness, atmosphere, price
Mouthwash—Color, effectiveness, germ-killing capacity, taste/flavor, price
Tires—Safety, tread life, ride quality, price

Consumers will pay the most attention to attributes that deliver the sought-after benefits. We
can often segment the market for a product according to attributes and benefits important to
different consumer groups.

BELIEFS AND ATTITUDES Through experience and learning, people acquire beliefs and
attitudes. These in turn influence buying behavior. A belief is a descriptive thought that a person
holds about something. Just as important are attitudes, a person’s enduring favorable or
unfavorable evaluations, emotional feelings, and action tendencies toward some object or idea.58
People have attitudes toward almost everything: religion, politics, clothes, music, food.
Attitudes put us into a frame of mind: liking or disliking an object, moving toward or away from
it. They lead us to behave in a fairly consistent way toward similar objects. Because attitudes economize on energy and thought, they can be very difficult to change. As a general rule, a company is well
advised to fit its product into existing attitudes rather than try to change attitudes. If beliefs and attitudes become too negative, however, more serious steps may be necessary. With a controversial ad
campaign for its pizza, Domino’s took drastic measures to try to change consumer attitudes.

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

169

Domino’s Known more for the speed of its delivery than for the
taste of its pizza, Domino’s decided to address negative perceptions head on. A
major communication program featured documentary-style TV ads that opened
with Domino’s employees at corporate headquarters reviewing written and
videotaped focus group feedback from customers. The feedback contained biting
and vicious comments, such as, “Domino’s pizza crust to me is like cardboard” and “The
sauce tastes like ketchup.” After President Patrick Doyle is shown on camera stating these results were unacceptable, the ads proceeded to show Domino’s chefs and executives in their
test kitchens proclaiming that its pizza was new and improved with a bolder, richer sauce; a
more robust cheese combination; and an herb-and garlic-flavored crust. Many critics were
stunned by the admission of the company that their number 2 ranked pizza, in effect, had
been inferior for years. Others countered by noting that the new product formulation and unconventional ads were addressing a widely held, difficult-to-change negative belief that was
dragging the brand down and required decisive action. Doyle summed up consumer reaction
as “Most really like it, some don’t. And that’s OK.”59

EXPECTANCY-VALUE MODEL The consumer arrives at attitudes toward
various brands through an attribute evaluation procedure, developing a set of beliefs
about where each brand stands on each attribute.60 The expectancy-value model of
attitude formation posits that consumers evaluate products and services by combining
their brand beliefs—the positives and negatives—according to importance.
Suppose Linda has narrowed her choice set to four laptop computers (A, B, C,
and D). Assume she’s interested in four attributes: memory capacity, graphics capability, size and weight, and price.
Table 6.4 shows her beliefs about how each
brand rates on the four attributes. If one computer dominated the others on all the criteria, we
could predict that Linda would choose it. But, as is often the case, her choice set consists of brands
that vary in their appeal. If Linda wants the best memory capacity, she should buy C; if she wants
the best graphics capability, she should buy A; and so on.
If we knew the weights Linda attaches to the four attributes, we could more reliably predict her
laptop choice. Suppose she assigned 40 percent of the importance to the laptop’s memory capacity,
30 percent to graphics capability, 20 percent to size and weight, and 10 percent to price. To find
Linda’s perceived value for each laptop according to the expectancy-value model, we multiply her
weights by her beliefs about each computer’s attributes. This computation leads to the following
perceived values:

Recognizing consumers’ solidly
entrenched beliefs, Domino’s
launched a bold ad campaign to
transform its image.

Laptop A = 0.4(8) + 0.3(9) + 0.2(6) + 0.1(9) = 8.0
Laptop B = 0.4(7) + 0.3(7) + 0.2(7) + 0.1(7) = 7.0

A Consumer’s Brand Beliefs about Laptop Computers

TABLE 6.4

Laptop Computer

Attribute
Memory Capacity

Graphics Capability

Size and Weight

Price

A

8

9

6

9

B

7

7

7

7

C

10

4

3

2

D

5

3

8

5

Note: Each attribute is rated from 0 to 10, where 10 represents the highest level on that attribute. Price, however, is indexed in a reverse manner, with 10 representing the lowest
price, because a consumer prefers a low price to a high price.

170

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Laptop C = 0.4(10) + 0.3(4) + 0.2(3) + 0.1(2) = 6.0
Laptop D = 0.4(5) + 0.3(3) + 0.2(8) + 0.1(5) = 5.0
An expectancy-model formulation predicts that Linda will favor laptop A, which (at 8.0) has the
highest perceived value.61
Suppose most laptop computer buyers form their preferences the same way. Knowing this, the
marketer of laptop B, for example, could apply the following strategies to stimulate greater interest
in brand B:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Redesign the laptop computer. This technique is called real repositioning.
Alter beliefs about the brand. Attempting to alter beliefs about the brand is called
psychological repositioning.
Alter beliefs about competitors’ brands. This strategy, called competitive depositioning, makes
sense when buyers mistakenly believe a competitor’s brand has more quality than it actually has.
Alter the importance weights. The marketer could try to persuade buyers to attach more
importance to the attributes in which the brand excels.
Call attention to neglected attributes. The marketer could draw buyers’ attention to neglected
attributes, such as styling or processing speed.
Shift the buyer’s ideals. The marketer could try to persuade buyers to change their ideal levels
for one or more attributes.62

Purchase Decision
In the evaluation stage, the consumer forms preferences among the brands in the choice set and
may also form an intention to buy the most preferred brand. In executing a purchase intention, the
consumer may make up to five subdecisions: brand (brand A), dealer (dealer 2), quantity (one
computer), timing (weekend), and payment method (credit card).

NONCOMPENSATORY MODELS OF CONSUMER CHOICE The expectancy-value

|Fig. 6.6|

Steps between
Evaluation of
Alternatives and a
Purchase Decision

model is a compensatory model, in that perceived good things about a product can help to
overcome perceived bad things. But consumers often take “mental shortcuts” called heuristics or
rules of thumb in the decision process.
With noncompensatory models of consumer choice, positive and negative attribute considerations don’t necessarily net out. Evaluating attributes in isolation makes decision making easier for a
consumer, but it also increases the likelihood that she would have made a different choice if she had
deliberated in greater detail. We highlight three choice heuristics here.
1.

2.
Purchase
decision

Attitudes of
others

Unanticipated
situational factors

Purchase
intention

Evaluation of
alternatives

3.

Using the conjunctive heuristic, the consumer sets a minimum acceptable cutoff level for each attribute and chooses the first alternative that meets the minimum standard for all attributes. For
example, if Linda decided all attributes had to rate at least 5, she would choose laptop computer B.
With the lexicographic heuristic, the consumer chooses the best brand on the basis of its perceived most important attribute. With this decision rule, Linda would choose laptop computer C.
Using the elimination-by-aspects heuristic, the consumer compares brands on an attribute
selected probabilistically—where the probability of choosing an attribute is positively related
to its importance—and eliminates brands that do not meet minimum acceptable cutoffs.

Our brand or product knowledge, the number and similarity of brand choices and time pressures present, and the social context (such as the need for justification to a peer or boss) all may affect whether and how we use choice heuristics.63
Consumers don’t necessarily use only one type of choice rule. For example, they might use a
noncompensatory decision rule such as the conjunctive heuristic to reduce the number of brand
choices to a more manageable number, and then evaluate the remaining brands. One reason for the
runaway success of the Intel Inside campaign in the 1990s was that it made the brand the first cutoff for many consumers—they would buy only a personal computer that had an Intel microprocessor. Leading personal computer makers at the time such as IBM, Dell, and Gateway had no choice
but to support Intel’s marketing efforts.

INTERVENING FACTORS Even if consumers form brand evaluations, two general factors can
intervene between the purchase intention and the purchase decision (see
Figure 6.6).64 The
first factor is the attitudes of others. The influence of another person’s attitude depends on two

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

171

things: (1) the intensity of the other person’s negative attitude toward our preferred alternative and
(2) our motivation to comply with the other person’s wishes.65 The more intense the other person’s
negativism and the closer he or she is to us, the more we will adjust our purchase intention. The
converse is also true.
Related to the attitudes of others is the role played by infomediaries’ evaluations: Consumer
Reports, which provides unbiased expert reviews of all types of products and services; J.D. Power,
which provides consumer-based ratings of cars, financial services, and travel products and services;
professional movie, book, and music reviewers; customer reviews of books and music on such sites
as Amazon.com; and the increasing number of chat rooms, bulletin boards, blogs, and so on where
people discuss products, services, and companies.
Consumers are undoubtedly influenced by these external evaluations, as evidenced by the success
of a small-budget movie such as Paranormal Activity, which cost only $15,000 to make but grossed
over $100 million at the box office in 2009 thanks to a slew of favorable reviews by moviegoers and
online buzz at many Web sites.66
The second factor is unanticipated situational factors that may erupt to change the purchase
intention. Linda might lose her job, some other purchase might become more urgent, or a store
salesperson may turn her off. Preferences and even purchase intentions are not completely reliable
predictors of purchase behavior.
A consumer’s decision to modify, postpone, or avoid a purchase decision is heavily influenced
by one or more types of perceived risk:67
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Functional risk—The product does not perform to expectations.
Physical risk—The product poses a threat to the physical well-being or health of the user
or others.
Financial risk—The product is not worth the price paid.
Social risk—The product results in embarrassment in front of others.
Psychological risk—The product affects the mental well-being of the user.
Time risk—The failure of the product results in an opportunity cost of finding another satisfactory product.

The degree of perceived risk varies with the amount of money at stake, the amount of attribute
uncertainty, and the level of consumer self-confidence. Consumers develop routines for reducing
the uncertainty and negative consequences of risk, such as avoiding decisions, gathering information from friends, and developing preferences for national brand names and warranties. Marketers
must understand the factors that provoke a feeling of risk in consumers and provide information
and support to reduce it.

Every year there are hit movies,
such as Paranormal Activity, that
ride a wave of buzz and favorable
consumer word of mouth to
box-office success.

172

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Postpurchase Behavior
After the purchase, the consumer might experience dissonance from noticing certain disquieting
features or hearing favorable things about other brands and will be alert to information that
supports his or her decision. Marketing communications should supply beliefs and evaluations
that reinforce the consumer’s choice and help him or her feel good about the brand. The marketer’s
job therefore doesn’t end with the purchase. Marketers must monitor postpurchase satisfaction,
postpurchase actions, and postpurchase product uses and disposal.

POSTPURCHASE SATISFACTION Satisfaction is a function of the closeness between
expectations and the product’s perceived performance.68 If performance falls short of expectations,
the consumer is disappointed; if it meets expectations, the consumer is satisfied; if it exceeds
expectations, the consumer is delighted. These feelings make a difference in whether the customer
buys the product again and talks favorably or unfavorably about it to others.
The larger the gap between expectations and performance, the greater the dissatisfaction. Here
the consumer’s coping style comes into play. Some consumers magnify the gap when the product
isn’t perfect and are highly dissatisfied; others minimize it and are less dissatisfied.69

POSTPURCHASE ACTIONS A satisfied consumer is more likely to purchase the product
again and will also tend to say good things about the brand to others. Dissatisfied consumers may
abandon or return the product. They may seek information that confirms its high value. They may
take public action by complaining to the company, going to a lawyer, or complaining to other
groups (such as business, private, or government agencies). Private actions include deciding to stop
buying the product (exit option) or warning friends (voice option).70
Chapter 5 described CRM programs designed to build long-term brand loyalty. Postpurchase
communications to buyers have been shown to result in fewer product returns and order cancellations. Computer companies, for example, can send a letter to new owners congratulating them on
having selected a fine computer. They can place ads showing satisfied brand owners. They can
solicit customer suggestions for improvements and list the location of available services. They can
write intelligible instruction booklets. They can send owners a magazine containing articles
describing new computer applications. In addition, they can provide good channels for speedy
redress of customer grievances.
POSTPURCHASE USES AND DISPOSAL Marketers should also monitor how buyers use
and dispose of the product (
Figure 6.7). A key driver of sales frequency is product
consumption rate—the more quickly buyers consume a product, the sooner they may be back in
the market to repurchase it.
Consumers may fail to replace some products soon enough because they overestimate product
life.71 One strategy to speed replacement is to tie the act of replacing the product to a certain holiday, event, or time of year.

|Fig. 6.7|
Get rid of it
temporarily

How Customers Use
or Dispose of
Products
Product
Source: Jacob Jacoby, et al., “What about
Disposition?” Journal of Marketing (July 1977),
p. 23. Reprinted with permission from the Journal of
Marketing, published by the American Marketing
Association.

Give it
away
Rent it
Lend it

Trade it

To be
used

Use it to serve
original purpose

Sell it

Direct to
consumer

Convert it to serve
a new purpose

Throw it
away

Through
middleman

Get rid of it
permanently

Keep it

To be
(re)sold

Store it

To
middleman

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

173

Oral B has tied toothbrush promotions to the springtime switch to daylight savings time.
Another strategy is to provide consumers with better information about either (1) the time they
first used the product or need to replace it or (2) its current level of performance. Batteries have
built-in gauges that show how much power they have left; toothbrushes have color indicators to
indicate when the bristles are worn; and so on. Perhaps the simplest way to increase usage is to learn
when actual usage is lower than recommended and persuade customers that more regular usage
has benefits, overcoming potential hurdles.
If consumers throw the product away, the marketer needs to know how they dispose of it, especially if—like batteries, beverage containers, electronic equipment, and disposable diapers—it can
damage the environment. There also may be product opportunities in disposed products: Vintage
clothing shops, such as Savers, resell 2.5 billion pounds of used clothing annually; Diamond Safety
buys finely ground used tires and then makes and sells playground covers and athletic fields; and,
unlike the usual potato chip maker, which discards some of the spud, Pringles converts the whole
potato into dehydrated potato flakes that are rolled and cut into chips.72

Moderating Effects on Consumer Decision Making
The manner or path by which a consumer moves through the decision-making stages depends on
several factors, including the level of involvement and extent of variety seeking, as follows.

LOW-INVOLVEMENT CONSUMER DECISION MAKING The expectancy-value
model assumes a high level of consumer involvement, or engagement and active processing the
consumer undertakes in responding to a marketing
stimulus.
Richard Petty and John Cacioppo’s elaboration
likelihood model, an influential model of attitude
formation and change, describes how consumers
make evaluations in both low- and high-involvement
circumstances.73 There are two means of persuasion
in their model: the central route, in which attitude
formation or change stimulates much thought and is
based on the consumer’s diligent, rational consideration of the most important product information;
and the peripheral route, in which attitude formation
or change provokes much less thought and results
from the consumer’s association of a brand with
either positive or negative peripheral cues. Peripheral
cues for consumers include a celebrity endorsement,
a credible source, or any object that generates positive feelings.
Consumers follow the central route only if they
possess sufficient motivation, ability, and opportunity. In other words, they must want to evaluate a
brand in detail, have the necessary brand and product or service knowledge in memory, and have sufficient time and the proper setting. If any of those
factors is lacking, consumers tend to follow the
peripheral route and consider less central, more
extrinsic factors in their decisions.
We buy many products under conditions of low
involvement and without significant brand differences. Consider salt. If consumers keep reaching for
the same brand in this category, it may be out of
habit, not strong brand loyalty. Evidence suggests we
have low involvement with most low-cost, frequently
purchased products.
Marketers use four techniques to try to convert a
low-involvement product into one of higher

Savers takes clothes consumers no
longer want and sells them to
other consumers who do want
them—at the right price.

174

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

involvement. First, they can link the product to an engaging issue, as when Crest linked its toothpaste to avoiding cavities. Second, they can link the product to a personal situation—for example,
fruit juice makers began to include vitamins such as calcium to fortify their drinks. Third, they
might design advertising to trigger strong emotions related to personal values or ego defense, as
when cereal makers began to advertise to adults the heart-healthy nature of cereals and the importance of living a long time to enjoy family life. Fourth, they might add an important feature—for
example, when GE lightbulbs introduced “Soft White” versions. These strategies at best raise consumer involvement from a low to a moderate level; they do not necessarily propel the consumer
into highly involved buying behavior.
If consumers will have low involvement with a purchase decision regardless of what the marketer can do, they are likely to follow the peripheral route. Marketers must give consumers one
or more positive cues to justify their brand choice, such as frequent ad repetition, visible sponsorships, and vigorous PR to enhance brand familiarity. Other peripheral cues that can tip the
balance in favor of the brand include a beloved celebrity endorser, attractive packaging, and an
appealing promotion.

VARIETY-SEEKING BUYING BEHAVIOR Some buying situations are characterized by low
involvement but significant brand differences. Here consumers often do a lot of brand switching.
Think about cookies. The consumer has some beliefs about cookies, chooses a brand without much
evaluation, and evaluates the product during consumption. Next time, the consumer may reach for
another brand out of a desire for a different taste. Brand switching occurs for the sake of variety,
rather than dissatisfaction.
The market leader and the minor brands in this product category have different marketing
strategies. The market leader will try to encourage habitual buying behavior by dominating the
shelf space with a variety of related but different product versions, avoiding out-of-stock conditions, and sponsoring frequent reminder advertising. Challenger firms will encourage variety seeking by offering lower prices, deals, coupons, free samples, and advertising that tries to break the
consumer’s purchase and consumption cycle and presents reasons for trying something new.

Behavioral Decision Theory
and Behavioral Economics
As you might guess from low-involvement decision making and variety-seeking, consumers don’t
always process information or make decisions in a deliberate, rational manner. One of the most active academic research areas in marketing over the past three decades has been behavioral decision
theory (BDT). Behavioral decision theorists have identified many situations in which consumers
make seemingly irrational choices.
Table 6.5 summarizes some provocative findings from this
research.74
What all these and other studies reinforce is that consumer behavior is very constructive and the
context of decisions really matters. Understanding how these effects show up in the marketplace
can be crucial for marketers.
The work of these and other academics has also challenged predictions from economic theory
and assumptions about rationality, leading to the emergence of the field of behavioral economics.75
Here, we review some of the issues in three broad areas—decision heuristics, framing, and other
contextual effects. “Marketing Insight: Predictably Irrational” summarizes one in-depth treatment
of the topic.

Decision Heuristics
Previously we reviewed some common heuristics that occur with noncompensatory decision making.
Other heuristics similarly come into play in everyday decision making when consumers forecast the
likelihood of future outcomes or events.76
1.

The availability heuristic—Consumers base their predictions on the quickness and ease with
which a particular example of an outcome comes to mind. If an example comes to mind too
easily, consumers might overestimate the likelihood of its happening. For example, a recent

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

TABLE 6.5

Selected Behavioral Decision Theory Findings

• Consumers are more likely to choose an alternative (a home bread maker) after a relatively
inferior option (a slightly better, but significantly more expensive home bread maker) is added to
the available choice set.
• Consumers are more likely to choose an alternative that appears to be a compromise in the particular choice set under consideration, even if it is not the best alternative on any one dimension.
• The choices consumers make influence their assessment of their own tastes and preferences.
• Getting people to focus their attention more on one of two considered alternatives tends to
enhance the perceived attractiveness and choice probability of that alternative.
• The way consumers compare products that vary in price and perceived quality (by features or
brand name) and the way those products are displayed in the store (by brand or by model type)
both affect their willingness to pay more for additional features or a better-known brand.
• Consumers who think about the possibility that their purchase decisions will turn out to be wrong
are more likely to choose better-known brands.
• Consumers for whom possible feelings of regret about missing an opportunity have been made
more relevant are more likely to choose a product currently on sale than wait for a better sale or
buy a higher-priced item.
• Consumers’ choices are often influenced by subtle (and theoretically inconsequential) changes in
the way alternatives are described.
• Consumers who make purchases for later consumption appear to make systematic errors in
predicting their future preferences.
• Consumer’s predictions of their future tastes are not accurate—they do not really know how they
will feel after consuming the same flavor of yogurt or ice cream several times.
• Consumers often overestimate the duration of their overall emotional reactions to future events
(moves, financial windfalls, outcomes of sporting events).
• Consumers often overestimate their future consumption, especially if there is limited availability
(which may explain why Black Jack and other gums have higher sales when availability is limited
to several months per year than when they are offered year round).
• In anticipating future consumption opportunities, consumers often assume they will want or need
more variety than they actually do.
• Consumers are less likely to choose alternatives with product features or promotional premiums
that have little or no value, even when these features and premiums are optional (like the opportunity to purchase a collector’s plate) and do not reduce the actual value of the product in any way.
• Consumers are less likely to choose products selected by others for reasons they find irrelevant, even
when these other reasons do not suggest anything positive or negative about the product’s values.
• Consumers’ interpretations and evaluations of past experiences are greatly influenced by the
ending and trend of events. A positive event at the end of a service experience can color later
reflections and evaluations of the experience as a whole.

2.

product failure may lead a consumer to inflate the likelihood of a future product failure and
make him more inclined to purchase a product warranty.
The representativeness heuristic—Consumers base their predictions on how representative
or similar the outcome is to other examples. One reason package appearances may be so similar for different brands in the same product category is that marketers want their products to
be seen as representative of the category as a whole.

| CHAPTER 6

175

176

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

•

Marketing Insight
Predictably Irrational

•

In a new book, Dan Ariely reviews some of his own research, as well as
that of others, that shows that although consumers may think they are
making well-reasoned, rational decisions, that is not often the case. As
it turns out, a host of mental factors and unconscious cognitive biases
conspire to result in seemingly irrational decision making in many different
settings. Ariely believes these irrational decisions are not random but
are systematic and predictable. As he says, we make the same
“mistake” over and over. Some of the thought-provoking research
insights he highlights include:
• When selling a new product, marketers should be sure to compare
it with something consumers already know about, even if the new
product is literally new-to-the-world with little direct comparisons.
Consumers find it difficult to judge products in isolation and feel
more comfortable if they base a new decision at least in part on a
past decision.

3.

Consumers find the lure of “free” almost irresistible. In one
experiment, consumers were offered normally high-priced
Lindt chocolate truffles for 15 cents and ordinary Hershey
kisses for a penny. Customers had to pick one or the other,
not both. Seventy-three percent of the customers went for the
truffles. When the prices were cut to 14 cents for the truffles
and free for the kisses, however, 69 percent of customers
went for the kisses, even though the truffles were actually a
better deal.
The “optimism bias” or “positivity illusion” is a pervasive effect that
transcends gender, age, education, and nationality. People tend to
overestimate their chances of experiencing a good outcome
(having a successful marriage, healthy kids, or financial security)
but underestimate their chances of experiencing a bad outcome
(divorce, a heart attack, or a parking ticket).

In concluding his analysis, Ariely notes, “If I were to distill one main
lesson from the research described in this book, it is that we are all
pawns in a game whose forces we largely fail to comprehend.”
Sources: Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational (New York: Harper Collins, 2008; Dan
Ariely, “The Curious Paradox of Optimism Bias,” BusinessWeek, August 24 and 31,
2009, p. 48; Dan Ariely, “The End of Rational Economics,” Harvard Business
Review, July–August 2009, pp. 78–84; “A Managers Guide to Human
Irrationalities,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Winter 2009), pp. 53–59; Russ
Juskalian, “Not as Rational as We Think We Are,” USA Today, March 17, 2008;
Elizabeth Kolbert, “What Was I Thinking?” New Yorker, February 25, 2008; David
Mehegan, “Experimenting on Humans,” Boston Globe, March 18, 2008.

The anchoring and adjustment heuristic—Consumers arrive at an initial judgment and then
adjust it based on additional information. For services marketers, a strong first impression is
critical to establish a favorable anchor so subsequent experiences will be interpreted in a more
favorable light.

Note that marketing managers also may use heuristics and be subject to biases in their own
decision making.

Framing
Decision framing is the manner in which choices are presented to and seen by a decision maker. A
$200 cell phone may not seem that expensive in the context of a set of $400 phones but may seem
very expensive if those phones cost $50. Framing effects are pervasive and can be powerful.
University of Chicago professors Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein show how marketers can
influence consumer decision making through what they call the choice architecture—the environment in which decisions are structured and buying choices are made. According to these researchers, in the right environment, consumers can be given a “nudge” via some small feature in
the environment that attracts attention and alters behavior. They maintain Nabisco is employing
a smart choice architecture by offering 100-calorie snack packs, which have solid profit margins,
while nudging consumers to make healthier choices.77

MENTAL ACCOUNTING Researchers have found that consumers use mental accounting
when they handle their money.78 Mental accounting refers to the way consumers code, categorize,
and evaluate financial outcomes of choices. Formally, it is “the tendency to categorize funds or
items of value even though there is no logical basis for the categorization, e.g., individuals often
segregate their savings into separate accounts to meet different goals even though funds from any
of the accounts can be applied to any of the goals.”79

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

177

Consider the following two scenarios:
1.

2.

Assume you spend $50 to buy a ticket for a concert.80 As you
arrive at the show, you realize you’ve lost your ticket. You decide
to buy a replacement.
Assume you decided to buy a ticket to a concert at the door. As
you arrive at the show, you realize somehow you lost $50 along
the way. You decide to buy the ticket anyway.

Which one would you be more likely to do? Most people choose
scenario 2. Although you lost the same amount in each case—$50—
in the first case, you may have mentally allocated $50 for going to a
concert. Buying another ticket would exceed your mental concert
budget. In the second case, the money you lost did not belong to any
account, so you had not yet exceeded your mental concert budget.
According to Chicago’s Thaler, mental accounting is based on a
set of core principles:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Consumers tend to segregate gains. When a seller has a product
with more than one positive dimension, it’s desirable to have
the consumer evaluate each dimension separately. Listing multiple benefits of a large industrial product, for example, can make the sum of the parts seem greater than the whole.
Consumers tend to integrate losses. Marketers have a distinct advantage in selling something if
its cost can be added to another large purchase. House buyers are more inclined to view
additional expenditures favorably given the high price of buying a house.
Consumers tend to integrate smaller losses with larger gains. The “cancellation” principle
might explain why withholding taxes from monthly paychecks is less aversive than large,
lump-sum tax payments—the smaller withholdings are more likely to be absorbed by the
larger pay amount.
Consumers tend to segregate small gains from large losses. The “silver lining” principle might
explain the popularity of rebates on big-ticket purchases such as cars.

Mental accounting principles help
predict whether consumers will or
will not go to a concert after
having lost a ticket or some
money.

The principles of mental accounting are derived in part from prospect theory. Prospect theory
maintains that consumers frame their decision alternatives in terms of gains and losses according
to a value function. Consumers are generally loss-averse. They tend to overweight very low probabilities and underweight very high probabilities.

Summary
1. Consumer behavior is influenced by three factors:
cultural (culture, subculture, and social class), social
(reference groups, family, and social roles and
statuses), and personal (age, stage in the life cycle,
occupation, economic circumstances, lifestyle,
personality, and self-concept). Research into these
factors can provide clues to reach and serve consumers more effectively.
2. Four main psychological processes that affect consumer behavior are motivation, perception, learning,
and memory.
3. To understand how consumers actually make buying
decisions, marketers must identify who makes and
has input into the buying decision; people can be initiators, influencers, deciders, buyers, or users. Different

marketing campaigns might be targeted to each type
of person.
4. The typical buying process consists of the following sequence of events: problem recognition, information
search, evaluation of alternatives, purchase decision,
and postpurchase behavior. The marketers’ job is to
understand the behavior at each stage. The attitudes of
others, unanticipated situational factors, and perceived
risk may all affect the decision to buy, as will consumers’ levels of postpurchase product satisfaction,
use and disposal, and the company’s actions.
5. Consumers are constructive decision makers and subject to many contextual influences. They often exhibit
low involvement in their decisions, using many heuristics as a result.

178

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is Target Marketing Ever Bad?

Marketing Discussion
Mental Accounts

As marketers increasingly tailor marketing programs to target
market segments, some critics have denounced these efforts
as exploitive. They see the preponderance of billboards
advertising cigarettes and alcohol in low-income urban areas
as taking advantage of a vulnerable market segment. Critics
can be especially harsh in evaluating marketing programs
that target African Americans and other minority groups,
claiming they often employ stereotypes and inappropriate
depictions. Others counter that targeting and positioning is
critical to marketing, and that these marketing programs are
an attempt to be relevant to a certain consumer group.
Take a position: Targeting minorities is exploitive versus
Targeting minorities is a sound business practice.

What mental accounts do you have in your mind about purchasing products or services? Do you have any rules you
employ in spending money? Are they different from what
other people do? Do you follow Thaler’s four principles in
reacting to gains and losses?

Marketing Excellence

>>Disney
Few
companies
have been able to
connect with a
specific audience
as well as Disney
has. From its
founding in 1923,
the Disney brand
has always been
synonymous with
quality entertainment for the entire family. The
company, originally founded by
brothers Walt
Disney and Roy
Disney, stretched
the boundaries of entertainment during the
20th century to bring classic and memorable family entertainment around the world. Beginning with simple blackand-white animated cartoons, the company grew into the
worldwide phenomenon that today includes theme parks,
feature films, television networks, theatre productions,
consumer products, and a growing online presence.
In its first two decades, Walt Disney Productions was
a struggling cartoon studio that introduced the world to its
most famous character ever, Mickey Mouse. Few believed
in Disney’s vision at the time, but the smashing success of

cartoons with sound and the first-ever full-length animated
film, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, in 1937 led, over
the next three decades, to other animated classics including Pinocchio, Bambi, Cinderella, and Peter Pan, live
action films such as Mary Poppins and The Love Bug,
and television series like Davy Crockett.
When Walt Disney died in 1966, he was considered
the best-known person in the world. By then the company
had expanded the Disney brand into film, television, consumer products, and Disneyland in southern California, its
first theme park, where families could experience the
magic of Disney in real life. After Walt’s death, Roy Disney
took over as CEO and realized Walt’s dream of opening
the 24,000 acre Walt Disney World theme park in Florida.
By the time of Roy’s death in 1971, the two brothers had
created a brand that stood for trust, fun, and entertainment that resonated with children, families, and adults
through some of the most moving and iconic characters,
stories, and memories of all time.
The company stumbled for a few years without the
leadership of its two founding brothers. However, by the
1980s, The Walt Disney Company was back on its
feet and thinking of new ways to target its core familyoriented consumers as well as expand into new areas
that would reach an older audience. It launched the
Disney Channel, Touchstone Pictures, and Touchstone
Television. In addition, Disney featured classic films during
The Disney Sunday Night Movie and sold classic Disney
films on video at extremely low prices in order to reach a
whole new generation of children. The brand continued to
expand in the 1990s as Disney tapped into publishing,
international theme parks, and theatrical productions that
reached a variety of audiences around the world.

ANALYZING CONSUMER MARKETS

| CHAPTER 6

179

Today, Disney is comprised of five business segments: The Walt Disney Studios, which creates films,
recording labels, and theatrical performances; Parks and
Resorts, which focuses on Disney’s 11 theme parks,
cruise lines, and other travel-related assets; Disney
Consumer Products, which sells all Disney-branded products; Media Networks, which includes Disney’s television
networks such as ESPN, ABC, and the Disney Channel;
and Interactive Media.
Disney’s greatest challenge today is to keep a 90year-old brand relevant and current to its core audience
while staying true to its heritage and core brand values.
Disney’s CEO Bob Iger explained, “As a brand that people
seek out and trust, it opens doors to new platforms and
markets, and hence to new consumers. When you deal
with a company that has a great legacy, you deal with decisions and conflicts that arise from the clash of heritage
versus innovation versus relevance. I’m a big believer in
respect for heritage, but I’m also a big believer in the need
to innovate and the need to balance that respect for heritage with a need to be relevant.”
Internally, Disney has focused on the Disney
Difference—“a value-creation dynamic based on high
standards of quality and recognition that set Disney apart
from its competitors.” Disney leverages all aspects of its
businesses and abilities to touch its audience in multiple
ways, efficiently and economically. Disney’s Hannah
Montana provides an excellent example of how the
company took a tween-targeted television show and
moved it across its various creative divisions to become a
significant franchise for the company, including millions of
CD sales, video games, popular consumer products, box

office movies, concerts around the world, and ongoing
live performances at international Disneyland resorts like
Hong Kong, India, and Russia.
Disney also uses emerging technologies to connect
with its consumers in innovative ways. It was one of the
first companies to begin regular podcasts of its television
shows as well as release ongoing news about its products and interviews with Disney’s employees, staff, and
park officials. Disney’s Web site provides insight into
movie trailers, television clips, Broadway shows, virtual
theme park experiences, and much more. And the company continues to explore ways to make Mickey Mouse
and his peers more text-friendly and virtually exciting.
According to internal studies, Disney estimates that
consumers spend 13 billion hours “immersed” with the
Disney brand each year. Consumers around the world
spend 10 billion hours watching programs on the Disney
Channel, 800 million hours at Disney’s resorts and theme
parks, and 1.2 billion hours watching a Disney movie—at
home, in the theatre, or on their computer. Today, Disney
is the 63rd largest company in the world with revenues
reaching nearly $38 billion in 2008.

Marketing Excellence

prizes, had to live in the IKEA store for three full days before it opened, which they gladly did.
IKEA achieved this level of success by offering a
unique value proposition to consumers: leading-edge
Scandinavian design at extremely low prices. The company’s fashionable bargains include products with unusual
Swedish names such as Klippan loveseats for $279, BILLY
bookcases for $60, and LACK side tables for $8. IKEA
founder Kamprad, who was dyslexic, believed it was
easier to remember product names rather than codes or
numbers. The company is able to offer such low prices in
part because most items come boxed and require the
customer to completely assemble them at home. This
strategy results in cheaper and easier transportation as
well as more efficient use of store shelf space.
IKEA’s vision is “to create a better everyday life for the
many people.” Its mission of providing value is predicated
on founder Kamprad’s statement that “People have very

>>IKEA
IKEA was founded in 1943 by a 17-year-old Swede
named Ingvar Kamprad. The company, which initially sold
pens, Christmas cards, and seeds from a shed on
Kamprad’s family farm, eventually grew into a retail titan in
home furnishings and a global cultural phenomenon,
what BusinessWeek called a “one-stop sanctuary for
coolness” and “the quintessential cult brand.”
IKEA inspires remarkable levels of interest and devotion from its customers. In 2008, 500 million visitors
walked through IKEA stores, which are located all over the
world. When a new location debuted in London in 2005,
about 6,000 people arrived before the doors opened. A
contest in Atlanta crowned five winners “Ambassador of
Kul” (Swedish for “fun”) who, in order to collect their

Questions
1. What does Disney do best to connect with its core
consumers?
2. What are the risks and benefits of expanding the
Disney brand in new ways?
Sources: “Company History,” Disney.com; “Annual Reports,” Disney.com; Richard Siklosc, “The Iger
Difference,” Fortune, April 11, 2008; Brooks Barnes, “After Mickey’s Makeover; Less Mr. Nice Guy,”
New York Times, November 4, 2009.

180

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

different experience than most furniture retailers. The floor
plan is designed in a one-way format, so the consumer
experiences the entire store first, then can grab a shopping cart, visit the warehouse, and pick up the desired
items in a flat box.
Many IKEA products are sold uniformly throughout
the world, but the company also caters to local tastes.
In China, it stocked 250,000 plastic placemats with
“Year of the Rooster” themes, which quickly sold out
after the holiday.
•
When employees realized U.S. shoppers were buying
vases as drinking glasses because they considered
IKEA’s regular glasses too small, the company developed larger glasses for the U.S. market.
•
IKEA managers visited European and U.S. consumers in their homes and learned that Europeans
generally hang their clothes, whereas U.S. shoppers
prefer to store them folded. Therefore, wardrobes for
the U.S. market were designed with deeper drawers.
• Visits to Hispanic households in California led IKEA to
add seating and dining space in its California stores,
brighten the color palettes, and hang more picture
frames on the walls.
IKEA has evolved into the largest furniture retailer in
the world with approximately 300 stores in 38 countries
and revenues topping €21.5 billion in 2009. Its top
countries in terms of sales include Germany, 16 percent;
United States, 11 percent; France, 10 percent; United
Kingdom, 7 percent; and Italy, 7 percent.
•

thin wallets. We should take
care of their interests.” IKEA adheres to this philosophy
by reducing prices across its products by 2 percent to
3 percent annually. Its focus on value also benefits the bottom line: IKEA enjoys 10 percent margins, higher than its
competitors such as Target (7.7 percent) and Pier 1
Imports (5 percent). IKEA sources its products from multiple companies all over the world rather than a handful of
suppliers as many furniture retailers do. This ensures the
lowest price possible, and savings that are passed on to
the consumer. Today, IKEA works with approximately
1,300 suppliers from 53 countries.
IKEA’s stores are located a good distance from most
city centers, which helps keep land costs down and taxes
low. The average IKEA customer drives 50 miles roundtrip to visit an IKEA store. Many stores resemble a large
box with few windows and doors and are painted bright
yellow and blue—Sweden’s national colors. They save
energy with low-wattage lightbulbs and have unusually
long hours of operation; some are 24-hour stores. When
a consumer walks through an IKEA store, it is a very

Questions
1. What are some of the things IKEA is doing right to
reach consumers in different markets? What else
could it be doing?
2. IKEA has essentially changed the way people shop for
furniture. Discuss the pros and cons of this strategy.
Sources: Kerry Capell, “IKEA: How the Swedish Retailer Became a Global Cult Brand,”
BusinessWeek, November 14, 2005, p. 96; “Need a Home to Go with That Sofa?” BusinessWeek,
November 14, 2005, p. 106; Ellen Ruppel Shell, “Buy to Last,” Atlantic, July/August 2009; Jon
Henley, “Do You Speak IKEA?” Guardian, February 4, 2008; IKEA, www.ikea.com.

This page intentionally left blank

PART 3 Connecting with Customers
Chapter 7 | Analyzing Business Markets
Chapter 8 | Identifying Market Segments and Targets

ter
p
a
Ch

7

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What is the business market, and how does it differ from the consumer
market?
2. What buying situations do organizational buyers face?
3. Who participates in the business-to-business buying process?
4. How do business buyers make their decisions?
5. How can companies build strong relationships with business
customers?
6. How do institutional buyers and government agencies do their buying?

From its Redwood Shores headquarters,
Oracle introduces innovative marketing
programs to satisfy its many business-tobusiness customers.

Analyzing
Business Markets
Business organizations do not only sell; they also buy vast quantities of raw
materials, manufactured components, plant and equipment, supplies, and business services.
According to the Census Bureau, there are roughly 6 million businesses with paid employees in the
United States alone. To create and capture value, sellers need to understand these organizations’
needs, resources, policies, and buying procedures.

Business-software giant Oracle became an industry leader by offering a whole range of
products and services to satisfy customer needs for enterprise software. Known originally for its flagship database management systems, Oracle spent $30 billion in recent
years to buy 56 companies, including $7.4 billion to buy Sun Microsystems, doubling
the company’s revenue to $24 billion and sending its stock soaring in the process.
To become a one-stop shop for all kinds of business customers, Oracle seeks to offer the
widest ranges of products in the software industry. It now sells
everything from server computers and data storage devices to
Some of the world’s most valuable brands belong to
operating systems, databases, and software for running accountbusiness marketers: ABB, Caterpillar, DuPont, FedEx, GE,
ing, sales, and supply-chain management. At the same time,
Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Intel, and Siemens, to name a few. Many
Oracle has launched “Project Fusion” to unify its different appliprinciples of basic marketing also apply to business marketers.
cations, so customers can reap the benefits of consolidating They need to embrace holistic marketing principles, such as
many of their software needs with Oracle. Oracle’s market power building strong relationships with their customers, just like any
has sometimes raised both criticism from customers and con- marketer. But they also face some unique considerations in
cerns from government regulators. At the same time, its many selling to other businesses. In this chapter, we will highlight
long-time customers speak to its track record of product innova- some of the crucial similarities and differences for marketing in
business markets.2
tion and customer satisfaction. 1

What Is Organizational Buying?
Frederick E. Webster Jr. and Yoram Wind define organizational buying as the decision-making
process by which formal organizations establish the need for purchased products and services and
identify, evaluate, and choose among alternative brands and suppliers.3

The Business Market versus the Consumer Market
The business market consists of all the organizations that acquire goods and services used in
the production of other products or services that are sold, rented, or supplied to others. The major
industries making up the business market are agriculture, forestry, and fisheries; mining; manufacturing; construction; transportation; communication; public utilities; banking, finance, and insurance; distribution; and services.

183

184

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

More dollars and items change hands in sales to business buyers than to consumers. Consider
the process of producing and selling a simple pair of shoes. Hide dealers must sell hides to tanners,
who sell leather to shoe manufacturers, who sell shoes to wholesalers, who sell shoes to retailers,
who finally sell them to consumers. Each party in the supply chain also buys many other goods and
services to support its operations.
Given the highly competitive nature of business-to-business markets, the biggest enemy to marketers here is commoditization.4 Commoditization eats away margins and weakens customer loyalty. It can be overcome only if target customers are convinced that meaningful differences exist in
the marketplace, and that the unique benefits of the firm’s offerings are worth the added expense.
Thus, a critical step in business-to-business marketing is to create and communicate relevant differentiation from competitors. Here is how Navistar has adjusted its marketing to reflect the economic crisis and a different customer mind-set.

Navistar Navistar sells trucks and buses under the International and IC brands. Its diverse customer base includes bookkeepers, truck drivers, insurance people, large retailers, and
so on. In recent years, these customers have been trying to cope with the harsh economic realities brought on by higher fuel prices, tougher federal regulation, and increased environmental
consciousness. To address these customer concerns, Navistar devised a new marketing strategy
and campaign. It introduced a new lineup of trucks and engines, including the first medium-duty hybrid truck
and new diesel engines. To support new product development, Navistar launched an extensive multimedia
marketing campaign that included an experiential truck stop and key industry event mobile tours, outbound
video e-mail, brand advertising, and an outreach program to bloggers. It
even shot a short documentary-style film, Drive and Deliver, which showcased three long-haul truckers driving around the country making deliveries
using one of Navistar’s new long-haul LoneStar truck models.5
Business marketers face many of the same challenges as consumer marketers. In particular, understanding their customers and
what they value is of paramount importance to both. A survey of top
business-to-business firms identified the following as challenges
they faced:6
1.
2.
3.
4.

Navistar’s innovative LoneStar
truck model was featured in a
short film directed by an Academy
Award nominee.

5.
6.
7.

Understanding deep customer needs in new ways;
Identifying new opportunities for organic business growth;
Improving value management techniques and tools;
Calculating better marketing performance and accountability
metrics;
Competing and growing in global markets, particularly China;
Countering the threat of product and service commoditization by bringing innovative offerings to market faster and moving to more competitive business models; and
Convincing C-level executives to embrace the marketing concept and support robust marketing programs.
Business marketers contrast sharply with consumer markets in some ways, however:

•

•

Fewer, larger buyers. The business marketer normally deals with far fewer, much larger buyers
than the consumer marketer does, particularly in such industries as aircraft engines and defense
weapons. The fortunes of Goodyear tires, Cummins engines, Delphi control systems, and other automotive part suppliers depends on getting big contracts from just a handful of major automakers.
Close supplier–customer relationship. Because of the smaller customer base and the importance
and power of the larger customers, suppliers are frequently expected to customize their offerings to
individual business customer needs. Through its Supplier Added Value Effort ($AVE) program,
Pittsburgh-based PPG industries challenges its suppliers of maintenance, repair, and operating
(MRO) goods and services to deliver on annual value-added/cost-savings proposals equaling at least
5 percent of their total annual sales to PPG. One preferred supplier submitted a suggestion to $AVE
that reduced costs for a lighting project by $160,000 by negotiating discounted prices for new fixtures and fluorescent bulbs.7 Business buyers often select suppliers that also buy from them. A paper
manufacturer might buy from a chemical company that buys a considerable amount of its paper.

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Professional purchasing. Business goods are often purchased by trained purchasing agents, who
must follow their organizations’ purchasing policies, constraints, and requirements. Many of the
buying instruments—for example, requests for quotations, proposals, and purchase contracts—
are not typically found in consumer buying. Professional buyers spend their careers learning how
to buy better. Many belong to the Institute for Supply Management, which seeks to improve professional buyers’ effectiveness and status. This means business marketers must provide greater
technical data about their product and its advantages over competitors’ products.
Multiple buying influences. More people typically influence business buying decisions.
Buying committees consisting of technical experts and even senior management are common
in the purchase of major goods. Business marketers need to send well-trained sales representatives and sales teams to deal with the well-trained buyers.
Multiple sales calls. A study by McGraw-Hill found that it took four to four and a half calls to
close an average industrial sale. In the case of capital equipment sales for large projects, it may
take many attempts to fund a project, and the sales cycle—between quoting a job and delivering the product—is often measured in years.8
Derived demand. The demand for business goods is ultimately derived from the demand for
consumer goods. For this reason, the business marketer must closely monitor the buying
patterns of ultimate consumers. Pittsburgh-based Consol Energy’s coal business largely
depends on orders from utilities and steel companies, which, in turn, depend on broader
economic demand from consumers for electricity and steel-based products such as automobiles, machines, and appliances. Business buyers must also pay close attention to current
and expected economic factors, such as the level of production, investment, and consumer
spending and the interest rate. In a recession, they reduce their investment in plant, equipment, and inventories. Business marketers can do little to stimulate total demand in this
environment. They can only fight harder to increase or maintain their share of the demand.
Inelastic demand. The total demand for many business goods and services is inelastic—that
is, not much affected by price changes. Shoe manufacturers are not going to buy much more
leather if the price of leather falls, nor will they buy much less leather if the price rises unless
they can find satisfactory substitutes. Demand is especially inelastic in the short run because
producers cannot make quick changes in production methods. Demand is also inelastic for
business goods that represent a small percentage of the item’s total cost, such as shoelaces.
Fluctuating demand. The demand for business goods and services tends to be more volatile
than the demand for consumer goods and services. A given percentage increase in consumer
demand can lead to a much larger percentage increase in the demand for plant and equipment
necessary to produce the additional output. Economists refer to this as the acceleration effect.
Sometimes a rise of only 10 percent in consumer demand can cause as much as a 200 percent
rise in business demand for products in the next period; a 10 percent fall in consumer demand
may cause a complete collapse in business demand.
Geographically concentrated buyers. For years, more than half of U.S. business buyers have
been concentrated in seven states: New York, California, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, New
Jersey, and Michigan. The geographical concentration of producers helps to reduce selling
costs. At the same time, business marketers need to monitor regional shifts of certain industries.
Direct purchasing. Business buyers often buy directly from manufacturers rather than
through intermediaries, especially items that are technically complex or expensive such as
mainframes or aircraft.

Buying Situations
The business buyer faces many decisions in making a purchase. How many depends on the complexity of the problem being solved, newness of the buying requirement, number of people involved, and
time required. Three types of buying situations are the straight rebuy, modified rebuy, and new task.9
•

Straight rebuy. In a straight rebuy, the purchasing department reorders supplies such as office
supplies and bulk chemicals on a routine basis and chooses from suppliers on an approved list.
The suppliers make an effort to maintain product and service quality and often propose automatic reordering systems to save time. “Out-suppliers” attempt to offer something new or
exploit dissatisfaction with a current supplier. Their goal is to get a small order and then
enlarge their purchase share over time.

| CHAPTER 7

185

186

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

•

•

Modified rebuy. The buyer in a modified rebuy wants to change product specifications, prices,
delivery requirements, or other terms. This usually requires additional participants on both
sides. The in-suppliers become nervous and want to protect the account. The out-suppliers see
an opportunity to propose a better offer to gain some business.
New task. A new-task purchaser buys a product or service for the first time (an office building, a new security system). The greater the cost or risk, the larger the number of participants,
and the greater their information gathering—the longer the time to a decision.10

The business buyer makes the fewest decisions in the straight rebuy situation and the most in
the new-task situation. Over time, new-buy situations become straight rebuys and routine purchase behavior.
New-task buying is the marketer’s greatest opportunity and challenge. The process passes
through several stages: awareness, interest, evaluation, trial, and adoption.11 Mass media can be
most important during the initial awareness stage; salespeople often have their greatest impact at
the interest stage; and technical sources can be most important during the evaluation stage. Online
selling efforts may be useful at all stages.
In the new-task situation, the buyer must determine product specifications, price limits, delivery terms and times, service terms, payment terms, order quantities, acceptable suppliers, and the
selected supplier. Different participants influence each decision, and the order in which these decisions are made varies.
Because of the complicated selling required, many companies use a missionary sales force consisting of their most effective salespeople. The brand promise and the manufacturer’s brand name
recognition will be important in establishing trust and the customer’s willingness to consider
change.12 The marketer also tries to reach as many key participants as possible and provide helpful
information and assistance.
Once a customer has been acquired, in-suppliers are continually seeking ways to add value to
their market offer to facilitate rebuys. Data storage leader EMC successfully acquired a series of computer software leaders to reposition the company to manage—and not just store—information,
often by giving customers customized information.13
Customers considering dropping six or seven figures on one transaction for big-ticket goods
and services want all the information they can get. One way to entice new buyers is to create a customer reference program in which satisfied existing customers act in concert with the company’s
sales and marketing department by agreeing to serve as references. Technology companies such as
HP, Lucent, and Unisys have all employed such programs.
Business marketers are also recognizing the importance of their brand and how they must execute well in a number of areas to gain marketplace success. Boeing, which makes everything from
commercial airplanes to satellites, implemented the “One Company” brand strategy to unify all its
different operations with a one-brand culture. The strategy was based in part on a triple helix representation: (1) enterprising spirit (why Boeing does what it does), (2) precision performance (how
Boeing gets things done), and (3) defining the future (what Boeing achieves as a company).14
NetApp is another good example of the increased importance placed on branding in business-tobusiness marketing.

NetApp NetApp is a Fortune 1000 company providing data management and storage
solutions to medium- and large-sized clients. Despite some marketplace success, the company
found its branding efforts in disarray by 2007. Several variations of its name were in use, leading
to a formal name change to NetApp in 2008. Branding consultants Landor also created a new
identity, architecture, nomenclature, tone of voice, and tagline (“Go further, faster.”) for the brand
and its new name. Messages emphasized NetApp’s superior technology, innovation, and customer-centric
“get things done” culture. Some of the marketing efforts supporting the brand, however, still left some things
to be desired. The Web sites were called “Frankensites” because they had been worked on and modified by
so many developers over a 12-year period. Web site makeovers streamlined and organized the company’s
presentation and made it easier to make changes and updates. The new Web site was estimated to increase
sales leads from inquiries by fourfold. Investing heavily in marketing communications despite the recession,
NetApp ran print and online ads and tapped into a number of social media outlets—communities and forums,
bloggers, Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.15

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

187

Business-to-business technology
leader NetApp has made a
concerted effort to build its brand
through a variety of marketing
communications and activities.

Systems Buying and Selling
Many business buyers prefer to buy a total problem solution from one seller. Called systems buying,
this practice originated with government purchases of major weapons and communications systems. The government solicited bids from prime contractors that, if awarded the contract, would be
responsible for bidding out and assembling the system’s subcomponents from second-tier contractors. The prime contractor thus provided a turnkey solution, so-called because the buyer simply
had to turn one key to get the job done.
Sellers have increasingly recognized that buyers like to purchase in this way, and many have
adopted systems selling as a marketing tool. One variant of systems selling is systems contracting, in
which a single supplier provides the buyer with its entire requirement of MRO supplies. During the
contract period, the supplier also manages the customer’s inventory. Shell Oil manages the oil inventories of many of its business customers and knows when they require replenishment. The customer benefits from reduced procurement and management costs and from price protection over
the term of the contract. The seller benefits from lower operating costs thanks to steady demand
and reduced paperwork.
Systems selling is a key industrial marketing strategy in bidding to build large-scale industrial
projects such as dams, steel factories, irrigation systems, sanitation systems, pipelines, utilities,
and even new towns. Customers present potential suppliers with a list of project specifications and
requirements. Project engineering firms must compete on price, quality, reliability, and other

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

attributes to win contracts. Suppliers, however, are not just at the mercy of customer demands.
Ideally, they’re active with customers early in the process to influence the actual development of the
specifications. Or they can go beyond the specifications to offer additional value in various ways, as
the following example shows.
Selling to the
Indonesian
Government

188

Selling to the Indonesian Government

The
Indonesian government requested bids to build a cement factory near Jakarta. A U.S. firm
made a proposal that included choosing the site, designing the factory, hiring the construction crews, assembling the materials and equipment, and turning over the finished factory to
the Indonesian government. A Japanese firm, in outlining its proposal, included all these
services, plus hiring and training the workers to run the factory, exporting the cement through its trading
companies, and using the cement to build roads and new office buildings in Jakarta. Although the
Japanese proposal involved more money, it won the contract. Clearly, the Japanese viewed the problem
as not just building a cement factory (the narrow view of systems selling) but as contributing to
Indonesia’s economic development. They took the broadest view of the customer’s needs, which is true
systems selling.

Participants in the Business
Buying Process
Who buys the trillions of dollars’ worth of goods and services needed by business organizations?
Purchasing agents are influential in straight-rebuy and modified-rebuy situations, whereas other
department personnel are more influential in new-buy situations. Engineering personnel usually
have a major influence in selecting product components, and purchasing agents dominate in selecting suppliers.16

The Buying Center
Webster and Wind call the decision-making unit of a buying organization the buying center. It consists of “all those individuals and groups who participate in the purchasing decision-making
process, who share some common goals and the risks arising from the decisions.”17 The buying
center includes all members of the organization who play any of the following seven roles in the
purchase decision process.
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.

7.

Initiators—Users or others in the organization who request that something be purchased.
Users—Those who will use the product or service. In many cases, the users initiate the buying
proposal and help define the product requirements.
Influencers—People who influence the buying decision, often by helping define specifications
and providing information for evaluating alternatives. Technical personnel are particularly
important influencers.
Deciders—People who decide on product requirements or on suppliers.
Approvers—People who authorize the proposed actions of deciders or buyers.
Buyers—People who have formal authority to select the supplier and arrange the purchase
terms. Buyers may help shape product specifications, but they play their major role in selecting vendors and negotiating. In more complex purchases, buyers might include high-level
managers.
Gatekeepers—People who have the power to prevent sellers or information from reaching
members of the buying center. For example, purchasing agents, receptionists, and telephone
operators may prevent salespersons from contacting users or deciders.

Several people can occupy a given role such as user or influencer, and one person may play
multiple roles.18 A purchasing manager, for example, often occupies the roles of buyer, influencer,
and gatekeeper simultaneously: She can determine which sales reps can call on other people in the
organization; what budget and other constraints to place on the purchase; and which firm will

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

actually get the business, even though others (deciders) might select two or more potential vendors
that can meet the company’s requirements.
The typical buying center has a minimum of five or six members and often has dozens. Some
may be outside the organization, such as government officials, consultants, technical advisors, and
other members of the marketing channel. One study found that 3.5 more people on average were
engaged in making a business purchase decision in 2005 than in 2001.19

Buying Center Influences
Buying centers usually include several participants with differing interests, authority, status, and
persuasiveness, and sometimes very different decision criteria. Engineers may want to maximize
the performance of the product; production people may want ease of use and reliability of supply;
financial staff focus on the economics of the purchase; purchasing may be concerned with operating and replacement costs; union officials may emphasize safety issues.
Business buyers also have personal motivations, perceptions, and preferences influenced
by their age, income, education, job position, personality, attitudes toward risk, and culture.
Buyers definitely exhibit different buying styles. There are “keep-it-simple” buyers, “own-expert”
buyers, “want-the-best” buyers, and “want-everything-done” buyers. Some younger, highly
educated buyers are computer experts who conduct rigorous analyses of competitive proposals
before choosing a supplier. Other buyers are “toughies” from the old school who pit competing
sellers against one another, and in some companies, the purchasing powers-that-be are
legendary.
Webster cautions that ultimately individuals, not organizations, make purchasing
decisions.20 Individuals are motivated by their own needs and perceptions in attempting to
maximize the rewards (pay, advancement, recognition, and feelings of achievement) offered by
the organization. Personal needs motivate their behavior, but organizational needs legitimate
the buying process and its outcomes. Thus, businesspeople are not buying “products.” They are
buying solutions to two problems: the organization’s economic and strategic problem, and
their own personal need for individual achievement and reward. In this sense, industrial buying decisions are both “rational” and “emotional”—they serve both the organization’s and the
individual’s needs.21
Research by one industrial component manufacturer found that although top executives at
its small- and medium-size customers were comfortable buying from other companies, they
appeared to harbor subconscious insecurities about buying the manufacturer’s product.
Constant changes in technology had left them concerned about internal effects within the company. Recognizing this unease, the manufacturer retooled its selling approach to emphasize
more emotional appeals and how its product line actually enabled the customer’s employees to
improve their performance, relieving management of the complications and stress of using
components.22
Recognizing these extrinsic, interpersonal influences, more industrial firms have put greater
emphasis on strengthening their corporate brand. At one time, Emerson Electric, a global
provider of power tools, compressors, electrical equipment, and engineering solutions, was a
conglomerate of 60 autonomous—and sometimes anonymous—companies. A new CMO
aligned the brands under a new global brand architecture and identity, allowing Emerson to
achieve a broader presence so it could sell locally while leveraging its global brand name. Record
sales and stock price highs soon followed.23 SAS is another firm that recognized the importance
of its corporate brand.

SAS With sales of more than $2.3 billion and a huge “fan club” of IT customers,
SAS, the business analytics software firm, seemed to be in an enviable position in 1999. Yet
its image was what one industry observer called “a geek brand.” In order to extend the
company’s reach beyond IT managers with PhDs in math or statistical analysis, the company needed to connect with C-level executives in the largest companies—the kind of
people who either didn’t have a clue what SAS’s software was and what to do with it, or who didn’t think
business analytics was a strategic issue. Working with its first outside ad agency ever, SAS emerged
with a new logo, a new slogan, “The Power to Know®,” and a series of TV spots and print ads in

| CHAPTER 7

189

190

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Like many business-to-business
firms, software giant SAS
emphasizes its corporate brand in
its marketing efforts.

business publications such as BusinessWeek, Forbes, and the Wall Street Journal. One TV spot that exemplifies SAS’s rebranding effort ran like this:

The problem is not harvesting the new crop of e-business information. It’s making sense of it. With
e-intelligence from SAS, you can harness the information. And put the knowledge you need within
reach. SAS. The Power to Know.
Subsequent research showed that SAS had made the transition to a mainstream business decisionmaking support brand and was seen as both user-friendly and necessary. Highly profitable and now
one of the world’s largest privately owned software companies, more than doubling its revenue stream
since the brand change, SAS has met with just as much success inside the company. For 14 years,
Fortune magazine has ranked it one of the best U.S. companies to work for; in 2010 the company was
number one.24

Targeting Firms and Buying Centers
Successful business-to-business marketing requires that business marketers know which types of
companies to focus on in their selling efforts, as well as who to concentrate on within the buying
centers in those organizations.

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

191

TARGETING FIRMS As we will discuss in detail in Chapter 8, business marketers may divide
the marketplace in many different ways to decide on the types of firms to which they will sell.
Finding those business sectors with the greatest growth prospects,
most profitable customers, and most promising opportunities for
the firm is crucial, as Timken found out.

Timken

When Timken, which manufactures
bearings and rotaries for companies in a variety of industries, saw its net income and shareholder returns dip
compared to competitors, the firm became concerned that
it was not investing in the most profitable areas. To identify businesses that operated in financially attractive sectors and
would be most likely to value its offerings, the company conducted an
extensive market study. It revealed that some customers generated a
lot of business but had little profit potential, while for others the
opposite was true. As a result, Timken shifted its attention away from
the auto industry and into the heavy processing, aerospace, and
defense industries, and it also addressed customers that were financially unattractive or minimally attractive. A tractor manufacturer
complained that Timken’s bearings prices were too high for its
medium-sized tractors. Timken suggested the firm look elsewhere but
continued to sell bearings for the manufacturer’s large tractors to the
satisfaction of both sides. By adjusting its products, prices, and communications to appeal to the right types of firms, Timken experienced
record revenue of $5.7 billion in 2008.25
It’s also true, however, that as a slowing economy has put a stranglehold on large corporations’ purchasing departments, the small and midsize business markets are offering new opportunities for suppliers. See “Marketing Insight: Big Sales to Small Businesses,” for more on this important B2B market.

•

Marketing Insight
Big Sales to Small Businesses
Small businesses—defined as those with fewer than 500 employees—
represent 99.7 percent of all employer firms and employ about half of all
private-sector employees. They have generated 60 percent to 80 percent
of net new jobs annually over the past decade. According to the Small
Business Administration’s Office of Advocacy, nearly 640,000 small businesses opened in the United States in 2007. Those new ventures all need
capital equipment, technology, supplies, and services. Look beyond the
United States to new ventures around the world and you have a huge and
growing B-to-B market. Here’s how two top companies are reaching it:

•

Timken has fine-tuned its
marketing activities to sell its
specialized bearing and rotary
products only to the most
promising prospects.

IBM counts small to midsize customers as 20 percent of its
business and has launched Express, a line of hardware, software services, and financing, for this market. IBM sells through
regional reps as well as independent software vendors and resellers, and it supports its small–midsize push with millions of
dollars in advertising annually, including in publications such as
American Banker and Inc. The company has also directly targeted gay business owners with ads in The Advocate and Out
and has partnered with nonprofits to reach racial and ethnic
minority segments.
American Express has been steadily adding new features to its
credit card for small business, which some small companies use
to cover hundreds of thousands of dollars a month in cash
needs. It has also created a small business network called OPEN
Forum to bring together various services, Web tools, and discount programs with other giants such as FedEx, JetBlue, Hertz,
and Hyatt. With OPEN Forum, American Express not only allows
customers to save money on common expenses, it also encourages them to do much of their recordkeeping on its Web site
and gain business insights.

192

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Small and midsize businesses present huge opportunities and huge
challenges. The market is large and fragmented by industry, size, and
number of years in operation. Small business owners are notably
averse to long-range planning and often have an “I’ll buy it when I
need it” decision-making style. Here are some guidelines for selling to
small businesses:
•

Don’t lump small and midsize businesses together. There’s a
big gap between $1 million in revenue and $50 million, or between
a start-up with 10 employees and a more mature business with
100 or more employees. IBM distinguishes its offerings to small
and medium-sized businesses on its common Web site for the two.

•

Do keep it simple. Simplicity means having one supplier point of
contact for all service problems, or one bill for all services and
products. AT&T serves millions of small business customers (fewer
than 100 employees) with services that bundle Internet, local
phone, long-distance phone, data management, business networking, Web hosting, and teleconferencing.

•

Do use the Internet. Hewlett-Packard found that time-strapped
small business decision makers prefer to buy, or at least research,
products and services online. So it designed a site targeted to

•

•

•

small and midsize businesses and pulls visitors through extensive
advertising, direct mail, e-mail campaigns, catalogs, and events.
Don’t forget about direct contact. Even if a small business
owner’s first point of contact is via the Internet, you still need to
offer phone or face time.
Do provide support after the sale. Small businesses want partners, not pitchmen. When the DeWitt Company, a 100-employee
landscaping products business, purchased a large piece of machinery from Moeller, the company’s president paid DeWitt’s CEO a personal visit and stayed until the machine was up and running properly.
Do your homework. The realities of small or midsize business management are different from those of a large corporation. Microsoft
created a small, fictional executive research firm, Southridge, and
baseball-style trading cards of its key decision makers to help
Microsoft employees tie sales strategies to small business realities.

Sources: Based on Barnaby J. Feder, “When Goliath Comes Knocking on David’s
Door,” New York Times, May 6, 2003; Jay Greene, “Small Biz: Microsoft’s Next Big
Thing?” BusinessWeek, April 21, 2003, pp. 72–73; Jennifer Gilbert, “Small but
Mighty,” Sales & Marketing Management (January 2004), pp. 30–35; www.sba.gov;
www.openforum.com; www-304.ibm.com/businesscenter/smb/us/en.

In developing selling efforts, business marketers can also consider their customers’ customers, or end users, if these are appropriate. Many business-to-business transactions are to
firms using the products they purchase as components or ingredients in products they sell to
the ultimate end users. A sharper focus on end users helped propel Thomson Reuters to greater
financial heights.

Thomson Reuters

Thomson
Reuters

Just before it acquired Reuters, global information
services giant Thomson Corporation embarked on an extensive research study to better
understand its ultimate customers. Thomson sold to businesses and professionals in the
financial, legal, tax and accounting, scientific, and health care sectors, but it felt it knew
much more about how a financial services manager made purchases for an entire
department, for example, than about how individual brokers or investment bankers used Thomson
data, research, and other resources to make day-to-day investment decisions for clients.
Segmenting the market by these end users, rather than by purchasers, and studying how they
viewed Thomson versus competitors allowed the firm to identify market segments that offered
growth opportunities. To better understand these segments, Thomson conducted surveys and “day
in the life” ethnographic research on how end users did their jobs. Using an approach called “three
minutes,” researchers combined observation with detailed interviews to understand what end users
were doing three minutes before and after they used one of Thomson’s products. Insights from the
research helped the company develop new products and make acquisitions that led to significantly
higher revenue and profits in the year that followed.26

TARGETING WITHIN THE BUSINESS CENTER Once it has identified the type of
businesses on which to focus marketing efforts, the firm must then decide how best to sell to them.
To target their efforts properly, business marketers need to figure out: Who are the major decision
participants? What decisions do they influence? What is their level of influence? What evaluation
criteria do they use? Consider the following example:
A company sells nonwoven disposable surgical gowns to hospitals. The hospital staff
who participate in this buying decision include the vice president of purchasing, the
operating-room administrator, and the surgeons. The vice president of purchasing

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

193

A number of different people play
a role in the purchase of hospital
products such as surgical gowns;
all these people have their own
objectives and interests.

analyzes whether the hospital should buy disposable gowns or reusable gowns. If the
findings favor disposable gowns, then the operating-room administrator compares
various competitors’ products and prices and makes a choice. This administrator considers absorbency, antiseptic quality, design, and cost and normally buys the brand
that meets functional requirements at the lowest cost. Surgeons influence the decision
retroactively by reporting their satisfaction with the particular brand.
The business marketer is not likely to know exactly what kind of group dynamics take place
during the decision process, although whatever information he or she can obtain about personalities and interpersonal factors is useful.
Small sellers concentrate on reaching the key buying influencers. Larger sellers go for multilevel
in-depth selling to reach as many participants as possible. Their salespeople virtually “live with”
high-volume customers. Companies must rely more heavily on their communications programs to
reach hidden buying influences and keep current customers informed.27
Business marketers must periodically review their assumptions about buying center participants.
For years Kodak sold X-ray film to hospital lab technicians, but research indicated that professional
administrators were increasingly making purchasing decisions. Kodak revised its marketing strategy
and developed new advertising to reach out to these decision makers.

The Purchasing/Procurement
Process
In principle, business buyers seek to obtain the highest benefit package (economic, technical, service,
and social) in relation to a market offering’s costs. To make comparisons, they will try to translate
all costs and benefits into monetary terms. A business buyer’s incentive to purchase will be a function

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

of the difference between perceived benefits and perceived costs.28 The marketer’s task is to construct a profitable offering that delivers superior customer value to the target buyers.
Business marketers must therefore ensure that customers fully appreciate how the firm’s offerings are different and better. Framing occurs when customers are given a perspective or point of
view that allows the firm to “put its best foot forward.” Framing can be as simple as making sure
customers realize all the benefits or cost savings afforded by the firm’s offerings, or becoming
more involved and influential in the thought process behind how customers view the economics
of purchasing, owning, using, and disposing product offerings. Framing requires understanding
how business customers currently think of and choose among products and services, and then
determining how they should ideally think and choose.
Supplier diversity is a benefit that may not have a price tag but that business buyers overlook
at their risk. As the CEOs of many of the country’s largest companies see it, a diverse supplier
base is a business imperative. Minority suppliers are the fastest-growing segment of today’s
business landscape.

Pfizer

One of the biggest names in pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, views its supplier-diversity
program as an essential tool in connecting with customers. Chief Diversity Officer Karen
Boykin-Towns directs diversity efforts that include recruitment and talent development inside
the company, as well as engaging with customers and suppliers outside the company. For
leadership, Pfizer also relies on a diversity and inclusion worldwide council and an infrastructure of “ambassadors” throughout the company. Pfizer concentrates its diversity efforts on women, LGBT,
people with disabilities, Latino/Hispanics, Asian Pacific Islanders, U.S. Caribbeans, and African Americans.
The company has spent about $700 million with 2,400 minority and women suppliers. Pfizer has even
developed a mentoring program that identifies women and minority suppliers that need help growing,
whether it’s designing a better Web site or building a better business plan. Pfizer managers meet with the
owners, often on-site, to figure out what they need.29
Pfizer

194

In the past, purchasing departments occupied a low position in the management hierarchy, in spite
of often managing more than half the company’s costs. Recent competitive pressures have led many
companies to upgrade their purchasing departments and elevate administrators to vice presidential
rank. These new, more strategically oriented purchasing departments have a mission to seek the best
value from fewer and better suppliers. Some multinationals have even elevated them to “strategic supply departments” with responsibility for global sourcing and partnering. At Caterpillar, purchasing,
inventory control, production scheduling, and traffic have been combined into one department. Here
are other companies that have benefited from improving their business buying practices.
•

•

•

Rio Tinto is a world leader in finding, mining, and processing the earth’s mineral resources
with a significant presence in North America and Australia. Coordinating with its suppliers
was time consuming, so Rio Tinto embarked on an electronic commerce strategy with one key
supplier. Both parties have reaped significant benefits from this new arrangement. In many
cases, orders are being filled in the suppliers’ warehouse within minutes of being transmitted,
and the supplier is now able to take part in a pay-on-receipt program that has shortened Rio
Tinto’s payment cycle to around 10 days.30
Mitsui & Co. Ltd is a leading Japanese trading firm that owns more than 850 companies and
subsidiaries. When the firm took its purchase orders and payments transactions for one group
online, it reduced the cost of purchase transactions by 50 percent and increased customer
satisfaction due to greater process efficiencies.31
Medline Industries, the largest privately owned manufacturer and distributor of health care
products in the United States, used software to integrate its view of customer activity across
online and direct sales channels. The results? The firm enhanced its product margin by
3 percent, improved customer retention by 10 percent, reduced revenue lost to pricing errors
by 10 percent, and enhanced the productivity of its sales representatives by 20 percent.32

The upgrading of purchasing means business marketers must upgrade their sales staff to match
the higher caliber of today’s business buyers.

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

195

Leading mining and exploration
company Rio Tinto has worked
with its suppliers to streamline the
way they get paid.

Stages in the Buying Process
We’re ready to describe the general stages in the business buying-decision process. Patrick J.
Robinson and his associates identified eight stages and called them buyphases.33 The model in
Table 7.1 is the buygrid framework.
In modified-rebuy or straight-rebuy situations, some stages are compressed or bypassed. For
example, the buyer normally has a favorite supplier or a ranked list of suppliers and can skip the
search and proposal solicitation stages. Here are some important considerations in each of the
eight stages.

TABLE 7.1

Buygrid Framework: Major Stages (Buyphases) of the
Industrial Buying Process in Relation to Major Buying
Situations (Buyclasses)
Buyclasses

Buyphases

New Task

Modified Rebuy

Straight Rebuy

1. Problem recognition

Yes

Maybe

No

2. General need description

Yes

Maybe

No

3. Product specification

Yes

Yes

Yes

4. Supplier search

Yes

Maybe

No

5. Proposal solicitation

Yes

Maybe

No

6. Supplier selection

Yes

Maybe

No

7. Order-routine specification

Yes

Maybe

No

8. Performance review

Yes

Yes

Yes

196

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Problem Recognition
The buying process begins when someone in the company recognizes a problem or need that can
be met by acquiring a good or service. The recognition can be triggered by internal or external
stimuli. The internal stimulus might be a decision to develop a new product that requires new
equipment and materials, or a machine that breaks down and requires new parts. Or purchased
material turns out to be unsatisfactory and the company searches for another supplier, or lower
prices or better quality. Externally, the buyer may get new ideas at a trade show, see an ad, or receive
a call from a sales representative who offers a better product or a lower price. Business marketers
can stimulate problem recognition by direct mail, telemarketing, and calling on prospects.

General Need Description and Product Specification
Next, the buyer determines the needed item’s general characteristics and required quantity. For
standard items, this is simple. For complex items, the buyer will work with others—engineers,
users—to define characteristics such as reliability, durability, or price. Business marketers can help
by describing how their products meet or even exceed the buyer’s needs.
The buying organization now develops the item’s technical specifications. Often, the company
will assign a product-value-analysis engineering team to the project. Product value analysis (PVA) is
an approach to cost reduction that studies whether components can be redesigned or standardized
or made by cheaper methods of production without adversely impacting product performance. The
PVA team will identify overdesigned components, for instance, that last longer than the product
itself. Tightly written specifications allow the buyer to refuse components that are too expensive or
that fail to meet specified standards. When HP won ISRI’s first Design for Recycling Award through
an application of PVA methods, it received this accolade:
HP has worked for many years to design products that are easier to recycle. The firm
operates several recycling facilities, which allows it to determine the most effective design
features to facilitate product recycling. HP has developed standards that integrate clear
design guidelines and checklists into every product’s design process to assess and improve
recyclability. Hewlett-Packard’s design process includes: Using modular design to allow
components to be removed, upgraded, or replaced; eliminating glues and adhesives by using, for example, snap-in features; marking plastic parts weighing more than 25g according
to ISO 11469 international standards, to speed up materials identification during recycling;
reducing the number and types of materials used; using single plastic polymers; using recycled plastic; using moulded-in colours and finishes instead of paint, coatings, or plating.34
Suppliers can use product value analysis as a tool for positioning themselves to win an account.
Regardless, it is important to eliminate excessive costs. Mexican cement giant Cemex is famed for
“The Cemex Way,” which uses high-tech methods to squeeze out inefficiencies.35

Supplier Search
The buyer next tries to identify the most appropriate suppliers through trade directories, contacts
with other companies, trade advertisements, trade shows, and the Internet.36 The move to Internet
purchasing has far-reaching implications for suppliers and will change the shape of purchasing for
years to come.37 Companies that purchase over the Internet are utilizing electronic marketplaces in
several forms:
•
•

•

Catalog sites. Companies can order thousands of items through electronic catalogs distributed by e-procurement software, such as Grainger’s.
Vertical markets. Companies buying industrial products such as plastics, steel, or chemicals or
services such as logistics or media can go to specialized Web sites (called e-hubs). Plastics.com
allows plastics buyers to search the best prices among thousands of plastics sellers.
“Pure Play” auction sites. Ritchie Bros. Auctioneers is the world’s largest industrial auctioneer,
with more than 40 auction sites worldwide. It sold $3.5 billion of used and unused equipment
at more than 300 unreserved auctions in 2009, including a wide range of heavy equipment,
trucks, and other assets for the construction, transportation, agricultural, material handling,
mining, forestry, petroleum, and marine industries. While most people prefer to bid in person
at Ritchie Bros. auctions, they are also able to bid online in real time at rbauction.com—the

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

197

The world’s largest industrial
auctioneer, Ritchie Bros., sells
a wide range of heavy equipment.

•

•
•
•

Company’s multilingual Web site. In 2009, 33 percent of the bidders at Ritchie Bros. auctions
bid over the Internet; online bidders purchased $830 million of equipment.38
Spot (or exchange) markets. On spot electronic markets, prices change by the minute.
ChemConnect.com is an online exchange for buyers and sellers of bulk chemicals such as
benzene, and it’s a B2B success in an arena littered with failed sites. First to market, it is now
the biggest online exchange for chemical trading, with 1 million barrels traded daily.
Customers such as Vanguard Petroleum Corp. in Houston conduct about 15 percent of their
spot purchases and sales of natural gas liquids on ChemConnect’s commodities trading site.
Private exchanges. Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and Walmart operate private exchanges to link
with specially invited groups of suppliers and partners over the Web.
Barter markets. In barter markets, participants offer to trade goods or services.
Buying alliances. Several companies buying the same goods can join together to form purchasing consortia to gain deeper discounts on volume purchases. TopSource is an alliance of
firms in the retail and wholesale food-related businesses.

Online business buying offers several advantages: It shaves transaction costs for both buyers and
suppliers, reduces time between order and delivery, consolidates purchasing systems, and forges
more direct relationships between partners and buyers. On the downside, it may help to erode
supplier–buyer loyalty and create potential security problems.

E-PROCUREMENT Web sites are organized around two types of e-hubs: vertical hubs
centered on industries (plastics, steel, chemicals, paper) and functional hubs (logistics, media
buying, advertising, energy management). In addition to using these Web sites, companies can use
e-procurement in other ways:
•
•

•

Set up direct extranet links to major suppliers. A company can set up a direct e-procurement account at Dell or Office Depot, for instance, and its employees can make their purchases this way.
Form buying alliances. A number of major retailers and manufacturers such as Acosta,
Ahold, Best Buy, Carrefour, Family Dollar Stores, Lowe’s, Safeway, Sears, SUPERVALU, Target,
Walgreens, Walmart, and Wegmans Food Markets are part of a data-sharing alliance called
1SYNC. Several auto companies (GM, Ford, Chrysler) formed Covisint for the same reason.
Covisint is the leading provider of services that can integrate crucial business information and
processes between partners, customers, and suppliers. The company has now also targeted
health care to provide similar services.
Set up company buying sites. General Electric formed the Trading Process Network (TPN),
where it posts requests for proposals (RFPs), negotiates terms, and places orders.

198

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Moving into e-procurement means more than acquiring software; it requires changing purchasing strategy and structure. However, the benefits are many: Aggregating purchasing across multiple
departments yields larger, centrally negotiated volume discounts, a smaller purchasing staff, and
less buying of substandard goods from outside the approved list of suppliers.

LEAD GENERATION The supplier’s task is to ensure it is considered when customers are—
or could be—in the market and searching for a supplier. Identifying good leads and converting
them to sales requires the marketing and sales organizations to take a coordinated, multichannel
approach to the role of trusted advisor to prospective customers. Marketing must work together
with sales to define what makes a “sales ready” prospect and cooperate to send the right messages
via sales calls, trade shows, online activities, PR, events, direct mail, and referrals.39
Marketing must find the right balance between the quantity and quality of leads. Too many
leads, even of high quality, and the sales force may be overwhelmed and allow promising opportunities to fall through the cracks; too few or low-quality leads and the sales force may become
frustrated or demoralized.40 To proactively generate leads, suppliers need to know about their
customers. They can obtain background information from vendors such as Dun & Bradstreet
and InfoUSA or information-sharing Web sites such as Jigsaw and LinkedIn.41
Suppliers that lack the required production capacity or suffer from a poor reputation will be
rejected. Those that qualify may be visited by the buyer’s agents, who will examine the suppliers’
manufacturing facilities and meet their staff. After evaluating each company, the buyer will end up
with a short list of qualified suppliers. Many professional buyers have forced suppliers to change
their marketing to increase their likelihood of making the cut.

Proposal Solicitation
The buyer next invites qualified suppliers to submit proposals. If the item is complex or expensive,
the proposal will be written and detailed. After evaluating the proposals, the buyer will invite a few
suppliers to make formal presentations.
Business marketers must be skilled in researching, writing, and presenting proposals. Written
proposals should be marketing documents that describe value and benefits in customer terms. Oral
presentations must inspire confidence and position the company’s capabilities and resources so
they stand out from the competition. Proposals and selling are often team efforts. Pittsburgh-based
Cutler-Hammer developed “pods” of salespeople focused on a particular geographic region, industry,
or market concentration. Salespeople can leverage the knowledge and expertise of coworkers
instead of working in isolation.42

Supplier Selection
Before selecting a supplier, the buying center will specify and rank desired supplier attributes, often
using a supplier-evaluation model such as the one in
Table 7.2.

TABLE 7.2

An Example of Vendor Analysis

Attributes

Rating Scale
Importance
Weights Poor (1) Fair (2) Good (3) Excellent (4)

Price

.30

Supplier reputation

.20

Product reliability

.30

Service reliability

.10

Supplier flexibility

.10

Total Score: .30(4) + .20(3) + .30(4)
+ .10(2) + .10(3) = 3.5

x
x
x
x
x

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

199

To develop compelling value propositions, business marketers need to better understand
how business buyers arrive at their valuations.43 Researchers studying how business marketers
assess customer value found eight different customer value assessment (CVA) methods.
Companies tended to use the simpler methods, although the more sophisticated ones promise
to produce a more accurate picture of CPV (see “Marketing Memo: Developing Compelling
Customer Value Propositions”).
The choice of attributes and their relative importance varies with the buying situation.
Delivery reliability, price, and supplier reputation are important for routine-order products. For
procedural-problem products, such as a copying machine, the three most important attributes
are technical service, supplier flexibility, and product reliability. For political-problem products
that stir rivalries in the organization (such as the choice of a computer system), the most
important attributes are price, supplier reputation, product reliability, service reliability, and
supplier flexibility.

OVERCOMING PRICE PRESSURES The buying center may attempt to negotiate with
preferred suppliers for better prices and terms before making the final selection. Despite moves
toward strategic sourcing, partnering, and participation in cross-functional teams, buyers still
spend a large chunk of their time haggling with suppliers on price. The number of price-oriented
buyers can vary by country, depending on customer preferences for different service configurations
and characteristics of the customer’s organization.44

marketing

Memo

Developing Compelling Customer Value Propositions

To command price premiums in competitive B2B markets, firms must create
compelling customer value propositions. The first step is to research the
customer. Here are a number of productive research methods:

7. Compositional approach—Ask customers to attach a monetary value
to each of three alternative levels of a given attribute. Repeat for other
attributes, then add the values together for any offer configuration.

1. Internal engineering assessment—Have company engineers use
laboratory tests to estimate the product’s performance characteristics. Weakness: Ignores the fact that the product will have different
economic value in different applications.

8. Importance ratings—Ask customers to rate the importance of different
attributes and their suppliers’ performance on each.

2. Field value-in-use assessment—Interview customers about how costs
of using a new product compare to those of using an incumbent. The
task is to assess how much each cost element is worth to the buyer.
3. Focus-group value assessment—Ask customers in a focus group what
value they would put on potential market offerings.
4. Direct survey questions—Ask customers to place a direct dollar value
on one or more changes in the market offering.
5. Conjoint analysis—Ask customers to rank their preferences for alternative market offerings or concepts. Use statistical analysis to estimate the
implicit value placed on each attribute.
6. Benchmarks—Show customers a “benchmark” offering and then a newmarket offering. Ask how much more they would pay for the new offering
or how much less they would pay if certain features were removed from
the benchmark offering.

Having done this research, you can specify the customer value proposition, following a number of important principles. First, clearly substantiate value claims by
concretely specifying the differences between your offerings and those of competitors on the dimensions that matter most to the customer. Rockwell Automation
determined the cost savings customers would realize from purchasing its pump
instead of a competitor’s by using industry-standard metrics of functionality
and performance: kilowatt-hours spent, number of operating hours per year, and
dollars per kilowatt-hour. Also, make the financial implications obvious.
Second, document the value delivered by creating written accounts of costs
savings or added value that existing customers have actually captured by using
your offerings. Chemical producer Akzo Nobel conducted a two-week pilot on a
production reactor at a prospective customer’s facility to document points-ofparity and points-of-difference of its high-purity metal organics product.
Finally, make sure the method of creating a customer value proposition is
well implemented within the company, and train and reward employees for
developing a compelling one. Quaker Chemical conducts training programs
for its managers that include a competition to develop the best proposals.

Sources: James C. Anderson, Nirmalya Kumar, and James A. Narus, Value Merchants: Demonstrating and Documenting Superior Value in Business Markets. (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2007); James C. Anderson, James A. Narus, and Wouter van Rossum, “Customer Value Propositions in Business Markets,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2006, pp. 2–10; James C. Anderson and James A. Narus, “Business Marketing: Understanding What Customers Value,” Harvard Business
Review, November 1998, pp. 53–65.

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Marketers can counter requests for a lower price in a number of ways. They may be able to show
evidence that the total cost of ownership, that is, the life-cycle cost of using their product, is lower
than for competitors’ products. They can cite the value of the services the buyer now receives, especially if they are superior to those offered by competitors. Research shows that service support and
personal interactions, as well as a supplier’s know-how and ability to improve customers’ time to
market, can be useful differentiators in achieving key-supplier status.45
Improving productivity helps alleviate price pressures. Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway
has tied 30 percent of employee bonuses to improvements in the number of railcars shipped per
mile.46 Some firms are using technology to devise novel customer solutions. With Web technology
and tools, Vistaprint printers can offer professional printing to small businesses that previously
could not afford it.47
Some companies handle price-oriented buyers by setting a lower price but establishing restrictive
conditions: (1) limited quantities, (2) no refunds, (3) no adjustments, and (4) no services.48
•

•
•

Cardinal Health set up a bonus-dollars plan and gave points according to how
much the customer purchased. The points could be turned in for extra goods or free
consulting.
GE is installing diagnostic sensors in its airline engines and railroad engines. It is now compensated for hours of flight or railroad travel.
IBM is now more of a “service company aided by products” than a “product company aided by
services.” It can sell computer power on demand (like video on demand) as an alternative to
selling computers.

Solution selling can also alleviate price pressure and comes in different forms. Here are three
examples.49
•
•
•

Solutions to Enhance Customer Revenues. Hendrix UTD has used its sales consultants to help
farmers deliver an incremental animal weight gain of 5 percent to 10 percent over competitors.
Solutions to Decrease Customer Risks. ICI Explosives formulated a safer way to ship explosives
for quarries.
Solutions to Reduce Customer Costs. W.W. Grainger employees work at large customer facilities to reduce materials-management costs.

More firms are seeking solutions that increase benefits and reduce costs enough to overcome
any low-price concerns. Consider the following example.
Lincoln Electric

200

Lincoln Electric

Lincoln Electric has a decades-long tradition of working
with its customers to reduce costs through its Guaranteed Cost Reduction Program. When a
customer insists that a Lincoln distributor lower prices to match competitors, the company and
the distributor may guarantee that, during the coming year, they will find cost reductions in the
customer’s plant that meet or exceed the price difference between Lincoln’s products and the
competition’s. The Holland Binkley Company, a major manufacturer of components for tractor trailers, had
been purchasing Lincoln Electric welding wire for years. When Binkley began to shop around for a better
price on wire, Lincoln Electric developed a package of reducing costs and working together that called for a
$10,000 savings but eventually led to a six-figure savings, a growth in business, and a strong, long-term
partnership between customer and supplier.50
Risk and gain sharing can offset price reductions that customers request. Suppose Medline, a
hospital supplier, signs an agreement with Highland Park Hospital promising $350,000 in savings
over the first 18 months in exchange for getting a tenfold increase in the hospital’s share of supplies.
If Medline achieves less than this promised savings, it will make up the difference. If Medline
achieves substantially more than promised, it participates in the extra savings. To make such
arrangements work, the supplier must be willing to help the customer build a historical database,
reach an agreement for measuring benefits and costs, and devise a dispute resolution mechanism.

NUMBER OF SUPPLIERS Companies are increasingly reducing the number of their suppliers.
Ford, Motorola, and Honeywell have cut their number of suppliers 20 percent to 80 percent. These
companies want their chosen suppliers to be responsible for a larger component system, they want

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

them to achieve continuous quality and performance improvement, and at the same time they
want them to lower prices each year by a given percentage. They expect their suppliers to work
closely with them during product development, and they value their suggestions.
There is even a trend toward single sourcing, though companies that use multiple sources often
cite the threat of a labor strike as the biggest deterrent to single sourcing. Companies may also fear
single suppliers will become too comfortable in the relationship and lose their competitive edge.

Order-Routine Specification
After selecting suppliers, the buyer negotiates the final order, listing the technical specifications, the
quantity needed, the expected time of delivery, return policies, warranties, and so on. Many industrial
buyers lease heavy equipment such as machinery and trucks. The lessee gains a number of advantages:
the latest products, better service, the conservation of capital, and some tax advantages. The lessor
often ends up with a larger net income and the chance to sell to customers that could not afford
outright purchase.
In the case of maintenance, repair, and operating items, buyers are moving toward blanket contracts rather than periodic purchase orders. A blanket contract establishes a long-term relationship in
which the supplier promises to resupply the buyer as needed, at agreed-upon prices, over a specified
period of time. Because the seller holds the stock, blanket contracts are sometimes called stockless
purchase plans. The buyer’s computer automatically sends an order to the seller when stock is needed.
This system locks suppliers in tighter with the buyer and makes it difficult for out-suppliers to break
in unless the buyer becomes dissatisfied with prices, quality, or service.
Companies that fear a shortage of key materials are willing to buy and hold large inventories.
They will sign long-term contracts with suppliers to ensure a steady flow of materials. DuPont,
Ford, and several other major companies regard long-term supply planning as a major responsibility
of their purchasing managers. For example, General Motors wants to buy from fewer suppliers,
who must be willing to locate close to its plants and produce high-quality components. Business
marketers are also setting up extranets with important customers to facilitate and lower the cost of
transactions. Customers enter orders that are automatically transmitted to the supplier.
Some companies go further and shift the ordering responsibility to their suppliers in systems
called vendor-managed inventory (VMI). These suppliers are privy to the customer’s inventory levels
and take responsibility for replenishing automatically through continuous replenishment programs.
Plexco International AG supplies audio, lighting, and vision systems to the world’s leading
automakers. Its VMI program with its 40 suppliers resulted in significant time and cost savings and
allowed the company to use former warehouse space for productive manufacturing activities.51

Performance Review
The buyer periodically reviews the performance of the chosen supplier(s) using one of three
methods. The buyer may contact end users and ask for their evaluations, rate the supplier on
several criteria using a weighted-score method, or aggregate the cost of poor performance to come
up with adjusted costs of purchase, including price. The performance review may lead the buyer to
continue, modify, or end a supplier relationship.
Many companies have set up incentive systems to reward purchasing managers for good buying
performance, in much the same way sales personnel receive bonuses for good selling performance.
These systems lead purchasing managers to increase pressure on sellers for the best terms.

Managing Business-to-Business
Customer Relationships
To improve effectiveness and efficiency, business suppliers and customers are exploring different
ways to manage their relationships.52 Closer relationships are driven in part by supply chain management, early supplier involvement, and purchasing alliances.53 Cultivating the right relationships
with business is paramount for any holistic marketing program.
Business-to-business marketers are avoiding “spray and pray” approaches to attracting and
retaining customers in favor of honing in on their targets and developing one-to-one marketing

| CHAPTER 7

201

202

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

approaches. They are increasingly using online social media in the form of company blogs,
online press releases, and forums or discussion groups to communicate with existing as well as
prospective customers.

Tellabs

Competing with industry giants Alcatel-Lucent and Cisco Systems, Tellabs
is a telecommunications equipment design and research company that provides equipment
to transmit voice, video, and data across communication networks. To differentiate itself,
Tellabs decided to develop a marketing campaign that would focus on tech-savvy end users
of products its customers sold. The campaign, “Inspire the New Life,” targeted telecommunication service providers to show how Tellabs understood the new generation of technology users and
provided solutions to meet their needs. After research showed
users were five times more likely to listen to an audio podcast
than to read a white paper, and twice as likely to watch a
video than listen to a podcast, Tellabs decided to use sixminute video “technology primers” instead of traditional case
studies and white papers. Its videos posted on YouTube,
Google Video, and the company’s Web site were downloaded
100,000 times. Adding a new podcast once or twice a month,
the company estimated that the campaign generated three
times the exposure, for the cost, than a traditional ad-based
Web campaign.54

The Benefits of Vertical
Coordination
Much research has advocated greater vertical coordination
between buying partners and sellers, so they can transcend
merely transacting and instead engage in activities that
create more value for both parties.55 Building trust is one
prerequisite to healthy long-term relationships. “Marketing
Insight: Establishing Corporate Trust, Credibility, and
Reputation” identifies some key dimensions of such trust.
Knowledge that is specific and relevant to a relationship
partner is also an important factor in the strength of interfirm ties.56
A number of forces influence the development of a
relationship between business partners.57 Four relevant
factors are availability of alternatives, importance of
supply, complexity of supply, and supply market
dynamism. Based on these we can classify buyer–supplier
relationships into eight categories:58
Tellabs differentiates itself by its
focus on the customers of its
customers.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Basic buying and selling—These are simple, routine exchanges with moderate levels of cooperation and information exchange.
Bare bones—These relationships require more adaptation by the seller and less cooperation
and information exchange.
Contractual transaction—These exchanges are defined by formal contract and generally have
low levels of trust, cooperation, and interaction.
Customer supply—In this traditional custom supply situation, competition rather than cooperation is the dominant form of governance.
Cooperative systems—The partners in cooperative systems are united in operational ways, but
neither demonstrates structural commitment through legal means or adaptation.
Collaborative—In collaborative exchanges, much trust and commitment lead to true
partnership.

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

Marketing Insight
Establishing Corporate Trust,
Credibility, and Reputation
Corporate credibility is the extent to which customers believe a firm can
design and deliver products and services that satisfy their needs and
wants. It reflects the supplier’s reputation in the marketplace and is the
foundation for a strong relationship.
Corporate credibility depends on three factors:
•
Corporate expertise—the extent to which a company is seen as
able to make and sell products or conduct services.
•
Corporate trustworthiness—the extent to which a company is seen as
motivated to be honest, dependable, and sensitive to customer needs.
•
Corporate likability—the extent to which a company is seen as likable,
attractive, prestigious, dynamic, and so on.
In other words, a credible firm is good at what it does; it keeps its
customers’ best interests in mind and is enjoyable to work with.
Trust is the willingness of a firm to rely on a business partner. It
depends on a number of interpersonal and interorganizational factors, such
as the firm’s perceived competence, integrity, honesty, and benevolence.

7.
8.

| CHAPTER 7

203

Personal interactions with employees of the firm, opinions about the company as a whole, and perceptions of trust will evolve with experience. A firm
is more likely to be seen as trustworthy when it:
•
Provides full, honest information
•
Provides employees incentives that are aligned to meet with
customer needs
•
Partners with customers to help them learn and help themselves
•
Offers valid comparisons with competitive products
Building trust can be especially tricky in online settings, and firms
often impose more stringent requirements on their online business partners than on others. Business buyers worry that they won’t get products
of the right quality delivered to the right place at the right time. Sellers
worry about getting paid on time—or at all—and how much credit they
should extend. Some firms, such as transportation and supply chain
management company Ryder System, use automated credit-checking
applications and online trust services to determine the creditworthiness
of trading partners.
Sources: Bob Violino, “Building B2B Trust,” Computerworld, June 17, 2002, p. 32;
Richard E. Plank, David A. Reid, and Ellen Bolman Pullins, “Perceived Trust in
Business-to-Business Sales: A New Measure,” Journal of Personal Selling and Sales
Management 19, no. 3 (Summer 1999), pp. 61–72; Kevin Lane Keller and David A.
Aaker, “Corporate-Level Marketing: The Impact of Credibility on a Company’s Brand
Extensions,” Corporate Reputation Review 1 (August 1998), pp. 356–78; Robert
M. Morgan and Shelby D. Hunt, “The Commitment–Trust Theory of Relationship
Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 58, no. 3 (July 1994), pp. 20–38; Christine
Moorman, Rohit Deshpande, and Gerald Zaltman, “Factors Affecting Trust in Market
Research Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 57 (January 1993), pp. 81–101;
Glen Urban, “Where Are You Positioned on the Trust Dimensions?” Don’t Just
Relate-Advocate: A Blueprint for Profit in the Era of Customer Power (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Education/Wharton School Publishers, 2005).

Mutually adaptive—Buyers and sellers make many relationship-specific adaptations, but
without necessarily achieving strong trust or cooperation.
Customer is king—In this close, cooperative relationship, the seller adapts to meet the
customer’s needs without expecting much adaptation or change in exchange.

Over time, however, relationship roles may shift or be activated under different circumstances.59
Some needs can be satisfied with fairly basic supplier performance. Buyers then neither want nor
require a close relationship with a supplier. Likewise, some suppliers may not find it worth their
while to invest in customers with limited growth potential.
One study found the closest relationships between customers and suppliers arose when the
supply was important to the customer and there were procurement obstacles, such as complex
purchase requirements and few alternate suppliers.60 Another study suggested that greater vertical
coordination between buyer and seller through information exchange and planning is usually
necessary only when high environmental uncertainty exists and specific investments (described
next) are modest.61

Business Relationships: Risks and Opportunism
Researchers have noted that establishing a customer–supplier relationship creates tension
between safeguarding (ensuring predictable solutions) and adaptation (allowing for flexibility
for unanticipated events). Vertical coordination can facilitate stronger customer–seller ties but
at the same time may increase the risk to the customer’s and supplier’s specific investments.
Specific investments are those expenditures tailored to a particular company and value chain

204

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

partner (investments in company-specific training, equipment, and operating procedures or
systems).62 They help firms grow profits and achieve their positioning.63 Xerox worked closely
with its suppliers to develop customized processes and components that reduced its copier
manufacturing costs by 30 percent to 40 percent. In return, suppliers received sales and volume
guarantees, an enhanced understanding of their customer’s needs, and a strong position with
Xerox for future sales.64
Specific investments, however, also entail considerable risk to both customer and supplier.
Transaction theory from economics maintains that because these investments are partially sunk,
they lock firms into a particular relationship. Sensitive cost and process information may need to
be exchanged. A buyer may be vulnerable to holdup because of switching costs; a supplier may be
more vulnerable because it has dedicated assets and/or technology/knowledge at stake. In terms of
the latter risk, consider the following example.65
An automobile component manufacturer wins a contract to supply an under-hood
component to an original equipment manufacturer (OEM). A one-year, sole-source
contract safeguards the supplier’s OEM-specific investments in a dedicated production
line. However, the supplier may also be obliged to work (noncontractually) as a partner
with the OEM’s internal engineering staff, using linked computing facilities to exchange
detailed engineering information and coordinate frequent design and manufacturing
changes over the term of the contract. These interactions could reduce costs and/or
increase quality by improving the firm’s responsiveness to marketplace changes. But they
could also magnify the threat to the supplier’s intellectual property.
When buyers cannot easily monitor supplier performance, the supplier might shirk or cheat and
not deliver the expected value. Opportunism is “some form of cheating or undersupply relative to an
implicit or explicit contract.”66 It may entail blatant self-serving and deliberate misrepresentation that
violates contractual agreements. In creating the 1996 version of the Ford Taurus, Ford Corporation
chose to outsource the whole process to one supplier, Lear Corporation. Lear committed to a contract
that, for various reasons, it knew it was unable to fulfill. According to Ford, Lear missed deadlines,
failed to meet weight and price objectives, and furnished parts that did not work.67 A more passive
form of opportunism might be a refusal or unwillingness to adapt to changing circumstances.
Opportunism is a concern because firms must devote resources to control and monitoring that
they could otherwise allocate to more productive purposes. Contracts may become inadequate to
govern supplier transactions when supplier opportunism becomes difficult to detect, when firms
make specific investments in assets they cannot use elsewhere, and when contingencies are harder
to anticipate. Customers and suppliers are more likely to form a joint venture (instead of signing a
simple contract) when the supplier’s degree of asset specificity is high, monitoring the supplier’s
behavior is difficult, and the supplier has a poor reputation.68 When a supplier has a good reputation, it is more likely to avoid opportunism to protect this valuable intangible asset.
The presence of a significant future time horizon and/or strong solidarity norms typically
causes customers and suppliers to strive for joint benefits. Their specific investments shift from
expropriation (increased opportunism on the receiver’s part) to bonding (reduced opportunism).69

New Technology and Business Customers
Top firms are comfortable using technology to improve the way they do business with their businessto-business customers. Here are some examples of how they are redesigning Web sites, improving
search results, leveraging e-mails, engaging in social media, and launching Webinars and podcasts to
improve their business performance.
•

•

Chapman Kelly provides audit and other cost containment products to help firms reduce their
health care and insurance costs. The company originally tried to acquire new customers
through traditional cold calling and outbound selling techniques. After it redesigned its Web
site and optimized the site’s search engine so the company’s name moved close to the top of
relevant online searches, revenue nearly doubled.70
Hewlett-Packard launched a “Technology at Work” e-mail newsletter to focus on retention of
its current customers. The newsletter’s content and format were based on in-depth research
to find out what customers wanted. Hewlett-Packard measures the effects of the newsletter
carefully and found that e-mailing product updates helped avoid inbound service calls, saving
millions of dollars.71

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

205

Health care cost-containment
service provider Chapman
Kelly finds its online marketing
efforts have provided bottom-line
rewards.

•

•

•

Emerson Process Management makes automation systems for chemical plants, oil refineries,
and other types of factories. The company blog about factory automation is visited by thousand
of readers who like to hear and swap factory war stories. It attracts 35,000 to 40,000 regular
visitors each month, generating five to seven leads a week. Given that the systems sell for up to
millions, ROI on the blog investment is immense.72
Machinery manufacturer Makino builds relationships with end-user customers by hosting an
ongoing series of industry-specific Webinars, producing an average of three a month. The
company uses highly specialized content, such as how to get the most out of machine tools and
how metal-cutting processes work, to appeal to different industries and different styles of
manufacturing. Makino’s database created from Webinar participants has allowed the firm to
cut marketing costs and improve its effectiveness and efficiency.73
Acquired by IBM in January 2008, Cognos provides business intelligence and performance
management software and services to help companies manage their financial and operational
performance. To increase their visibility and improve customer relations, Cognos launched BI
radio, an RSS-enabled series of 30-minute podcasts released every six weeks addressing a range
of topics such as marketing, leadership, business management, and “killer apps.” Attracting 60,000
subscribers, the podcasts are thought to have directly or indirectly led to $7 million in deals.74

Institutional and Government
Markets
Our discussion has concentrated largely on the buying behavior of profit-seeking companies. Much
of what we have said also applies to the buying practices of institutional and government organizations. However, we want to highlight certain special features of these markets.
The institutional market consists of schools, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, and other institutions that must provide goods and services to people in their care. Many of these organizations

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

are characterized by low budgets and captive clienteles. For example, hospitals must decide what
quality of food to buy for patients. The buying objective here is not profit, because the food is provided as part of the total service package; nor is cost minimization the sole objective, because poor
food will cause patients to complain and hurt the hospital’s reputation. The hospital purchasing
agent must search for institutional-food vendors whose quality meets or exceeds a certain minimum standard and whose prices are low. In fact, many food vendors set up a separate sales division
to cater to institutional buyers’ special needs and characteristics. Heinz produces, packages, and
prices its ketchup differently to meet the requirements of hospitals, colleges, and prisons. ARAMARK,
which provides food services for stadiums, arenas, campuses, businesses, and schools, also has a
competitive advantage in providing food for the nation’s prisons, a direct result of refining its purchasing practices and supply chain management.

ARAMARK

Where ARAMARK once merely selected products from lists provided
by potential suppliers, it now collaborates with suppliers to develop products customized to
meet the needs of individual segments. In the corrections segment, quality has historically
been sacrificed to meet food cost limits that operators outside the market would find impossible to work with. “When you go after business in the corrections field, you are making bids
that are measured in hundredths of a cent,” says John Zillmer, president of ARAMARK’s Food & Support
Services, “so any edge we can gain on the purchasing side is extremely valuable.” ARAMARK sourced a
series of protein products with unique partners at price points it never could have imagined before. These
partners were unique because they understood the chemistry of proteins and knew how to lower the
price while still creating a product acceptable to ARAMARK’s customers, allowing ARAMARK to drive
down costs. Then ARAMARK replicated this process with 163 different items formulated exclusively for
corrections. Rather than reducing food costs by 1 cent or so a meal as usual, ARAMARK took 5 to 9 cents
off—while maintaining or even improving quality.75
ARAMARK

206

In most countries, government organizations are a major buyer of goods and services. They typically require suppliers to submit bids and often award the contract to the lowest bidder. In some
cases, they will make allowance for superior quality or a reputation for completing contracts on
time. Governments will also buy on a negotiated contract basis, primarily in complex projects with
major R&D costs and risks and those where there is little competition.
A major complaint of multinationals operating in Europe is that each country shows favoritism
toward its nationals despite superior offers from foreign firms. Although such practices are fairly
entrenched, the European Union is attempting to remove this bias.
Because their spending decisions are subject to public review, government organizations
require considerable paperwork from suppliers, who often complain about bureaucracy, regulations, decision-making delays, and frequent shifts in procurement staff. But the fact remains that
the U.S. government bought goods and services valued at $220 billion in fiscal year 2009, making
it the largest and therefore most potentially attractive customer in the world.
It is not just the dollar figure that is large, but the number of individual acquisitions.
According to the General Services Administration Procurement Data Center, over 20 million
individual contract actions are processed every year. Although most items purchased cost
between $2,500 and $25,000, the government also makes purchases in the billions, many in
technology.
Government decision makers often think vendors have not done their homework. Different
types of agencies—defense, civilian, intelligence—have different needs, priorities, purchasing
styles, and time frames. In addition, vendors do not pay enough attention to cost justification, a
major activity for government procurement professionals. Companies hoping to be government
contractors need to help government agencies see the bottom-line impact of products.
Demonstrating useful experience and successful past performance through case studies, especially
with other government organizations, can be influential.76
Just as companies provide government agencies with guidelines about how best to purchase and
use their products, governments provide would-be suppliers with detailed guidelines describing
how to sell to the government. Failure to follow the guidelines or to fill out forms and contracts
correctly can create a legal nightmare.77

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

| CHAPTER 7

207

Fortunately for businesses of all sizes, the federal government has been trying to simplify the
contracting procedure and make bidding more attractive. Reforms place more emphasis on buying off-the-shelf items instead of items built to the government’s specs, communicating with
vendors online to eliminate the massive paperwork, and giving vendors who lose a bid a “debriefing” from the appropriate government agency to increase their chances of winning the next time
around.78 More purchasing is being done online via Web-based forms, digital signatures, and
electronic procurement cards (P-cards).79 Several federal agencies that act as purchasing agents
for the rest of the government have launched Web-based catalogs that allow authorized defense
and civilian agencies to buy everything from medical and office supplies to clothing online. The
General Services Administration, for example, not only sells stocked merchandise through its
Web site but also creates direct links between buyers and contract suppliers. A good starting
point for any work with the U.S. government is to make sure the company is in the Central
Contractor Registration (CCR) database (www.ccr.gov), which collects, validates, stores, and
disseminates data in support of agency acquisitions.80
In spite of these reforms, for a number of reasons many companies that sell to the government have not used a marketing orientation. Some, though, have pursued government
business by establishing separate government marketing departments. Companies such as
Gateway, Rockwell, Kodak, and Goodyear anticipate government needs and projects, participate in the product specification phase, gather competitive intelligence, prepare bids
carefully, and produce strong communications to describe and enhance their companies’
reputations.

Summary
1. Organizational buying is the decision-making process
by which formal organizations establish the need
for purchased products and services, then identify,
evaluate, and choose among alternative brands and
suppliers. The business market consists of all the
organizations that acquire goods and services used in
the production of other products or services that are
sold, rented, or supplied to others.
2. Compared to consumer markets, business markets
generally have fewer and larger buyers, a closer customer supplier relationship, and more geographically
concentrated buyers. Demand in the business market
is derived from demand in the consumer market and
fluctuates with the business cycle. Nonetheless, the total demand for many business goods and services is
quite price inelastic. Business marketers need to be
aware of the role of professional purchasers and their
influencers, the need for multiple sales calls, and the importance of direct purchasing, reciprocity, and leasing.
3. The buying center is the decision-making unit of a buying
organization. It consists of initiators, users, influencers,

deciders, approvers, buyers, and gatekeepers. To influence these parties, marketers must be aware of environmental, organizational, interpersonal, and individual factors.
4. The buying process consists of eight stages called
buyphases: (1) problem recognition, (2) general need
description, (3) product specification, (4) supplier search,
(5) proposal solicitation, (6) supplier selection, (7) orderroutine specification, and (8) performance review.
5. Business marketers must form strong bonds and relationships with their customers and provide them added
value. Some customers, however, may prefer a transactional relationship. Technology is aiding the development of strong business relationships.
6. The institutional market consists of schools, hospitals,
nursing homes, prisons, and other institutions that provide goods and services to people in their care. Buyers for
government organizations tend to require a great deal of
paperwork from their vendors and to favor open bidding
and domestic companies. Suppliers must be prepared to
adapt their offers to the special needs and procedures
found in institutional and government markets.

208

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Applications
Marketing Debate
How Different Is Business-to-Business
Marketing?
Many business-to-business marketing executives lament
the challenges of business-to-business marketing, maintaining that many traditional marketing concepts and principles do not apply. For a number of reasons, they assert that
selling products and services to a company is fundamentally
different from selling to individuals. Others disagree, claiming marketing theory is still valid and only requires some
adaptation in marketing tactics.
Take a position: Business-to-business marketing
requires a special, unique set of marketing concepts
and principles versus Business-to-business marketing is really not that different, and the basic marketing
concepts and principles apply.

Marketing Excellence

>>Accenture

Accenture began in 1942 as Administrative Accounting
Group, the consulting arm of accounting firm Arthur
Andersen. In 1989, it launched as a separate business
unit focused on IT consulting and bearing the name
Andersen Consulting. At that time, though it was earning
$1 billion annually, Andersen Consulting had low brand
awareness among information technology consultancies
and was commonly mistaken for its accounting corpo-

Marketing Discussion
B-to-C & B-to-B Concepts
Consider some of the consumer behavior topics for businessto-consumer (B-to-C) marketing from Chapter 6. How might
you apply them to business-to-business (B-to-B) settings?
For example, how might noncompensatory models of
choice work? Mental accounting?

rate parent. To build its brand and separate itself from the
accounting firm, Andersen Consulting launched the first
large-scale advertising campaign in the professional
services area. By the end of the decade, it was the
world’s largest management and technology consulting
organization.
In 2000, following arbitration against its former parent, Andersen Consulting was granted its full independence from Arthur Andersen—but it had to relinquish the
Andersen name. Andersen Consulting was given three
months to find a name that was able to be trademarked in
47 countries, effective and inoffensive in over 200 languages, and acceptable to employees and clients—and
that corresponded with an available URL. The effort that
followed was one of the largest—and most successful—
rebranding campaigns in corporate history.
As luck would have it, the company’s new name
came from a consultant at the company’s Oslo office,
who submitted “Accenture” as part of an internal namegeneration initiative dubbed “Brandstorming.” The consultant coined the Accenture name because it rhymed
with “adventure” and connoted an “accent on the future.”
The name also retained the “Ac” of the original Andersen
Consulting name (echoing the Ac.com Web site), which
would help the firm retain some of its former brand equity.
On midnight, December 31, 2000, Andersen Consulting
officially adopted the Accenture name and launched a
global marketing campaign targeting senior executives at

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

Accenture’s clients and prospects, all Accenture partners
and employees, the media, leading industry analysts,
potential recruits, and academia.
The results of the advertising, marketing, and communications campaigns were quick and impressive.
Overall, Accenture’s brand equity increased 11 percent,
and the number of firms inquiring about its services
increased 350 percent. Awareness of Accenture’s
breadth and depth of services achieved 96 percent of its
previous level. Globally, awareness of Accenture as a
provider of management and technology consulting
services was 76 percent of levels for the former Andersen
Consulting name. These results enabled Accenture to
successfully complete a $1.7 billion IPO in July 2001.
In 2002, Accenture unveiled a new positioning to reflect its new role as a partner to aid execution of strategy,
summarized succinctly by the tagline “Innovation
Delivered.” This tagline was supported by the statement,
“From innovation to execution, Accenture helps accelerate your vision.” Accenture surveyed senior executives
from different industries and countries and confirmed that
they saw inability to execute and deliver on ideas as the
number one barrier to success.
Accenture saw its differentiator as the ability both to
provide innovative ideas—ideas grounded in business
processes as well as IT—and to execute them. Competitors
such as McKinsey were seen as highly specialized at developing strategy, whereas other competitors such as IBM
were seen as highly skilled in technological implementation.
Accenture wanted to be seen as excelling at both. As Ian
Watmore, its UK chief, explained: “Unless you can provide
both transformational consulting and outsourcing capability,
you’re not going to win. Clients expect both.”
In 2002, the business climate changed. After the
dot-com crash and the economic downturn, innovation
was no longer enough. Executives wanted bottom-line
results. As part of its new commitment to helping clients
achieve their business objectives, Accenture introduced
a policy whereby many of its contracts contained incentives that it realized only if specific business targets
were met. For instance, a contract with British travel
agent Thomas Cook was structured such that
Accenture’s bonus depended on five metrics, including
a cost-cutting one.
In late 2003, Accenture built upon the “Innovation
Delivered” theme and announced its new tagline, “High
Performance. Delivered,” along with a campaign that featured golf superstar Tiger Woods as spokesperson. When
Accenture sought Woods out, the athlete was at the top
of his game—the world’s best golfer with an impeccable
image. What better symbol for high performance?
Accenture’s message communicated that it could help

| CHAPTER 7

209

client companies become “high-performing business
leaders,” and the Woods endorsement drove home the
importance of high performance.
Over the next six years, Accenture spent nearly
$300 million in ads that mostly featured Tiger Woods,
alongside slogans such as “We know what it takes to be a
Tiger” and “Go on. Be a Tiger.” The campaign capitalized
on Woods’s international appeal, ran all over the world,
and became the central focus of Accenture-sponsored
events such as the World Golf Championships and the
Chicago Marathon.
That all changed when the scandal surrounding Tiger
Woods, his extramarital affairs, and his indefinite absence
from golf hit the press in late 2009. Accenture dropped
Woods as a spokesperson, saying he was no longer a
good fit for its brand. Indeed, focus groups showed that
consumers were too distracted by the scandal to focus
on Accenture’s strategic message. Accenture quickly
searched for a new concept that not only resonated
across the world, translated appropriately into different
cultures, but also cut its ties with Woods.
The result came after the firm dusted off some previous concepts, tested them with focus groups of business
professionals, and launched a $50 million campaign featuring animals and the same slogan, “High Performance.
Delivered.” In one ad, an elephant is pictured surfing
alongside copy that reads, “Who says you can’t be big
and nimble?” In a later ad, a lizard tries to catch a butterfly
by transforming its tongue into the design of a flower. The
copy stated, “If you innovate, they will come.”
Today, Accenture continues to excel as a global
management consulting, technology services, and outsourcing company. Its clients include 99 of the Fortune
Global 100 and more than three-quarters of the
Fortune Global 500. The company ended fiscal 2009
with revenues of $21.5 billion.
Questions
1. What has Accenture done well to target its B-to-B
audience?
2. Has Accenture done the right thing by dropping Tiger
Woods as its spokesperson? Discuss the pros and
cons of its decision.
Sources: “Annual Reports,” Accenture.com; “Lessons Learned from Top Firms’ Marketing
Blunders,” Management Consultant International, December 2003, p. 1; Sean Callahan, “Tiger Tees
Off in New Accenture Campaign,” BtoB Magazine, October 13, 2003, p. 3; “Inside Accenture’s
Biggest UK Client,” Management Consultant International, October 2003, pp. 1–3; “Accenture’s
Results Highlight Weakness of Consulting Market,” Management Consultant International, October
2003, pp. 8–10; “Accenture Re-Branding Wins UK Plaudits,” Management Consultant International,
October 2002, p. 5; Mary Ellen Podmolik, “Accenture Turns to Tiger for Global Marketing Effort,”
BtoB Magazine, October 25, 2004; Sean Callahan, “Tiger Tees Off in New Accenture Campaign,”
BtoB Magazine, October 13, 2003; Emily Steel, “After Ditching Tiger, Accenture Tries New Game,”
Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2010.

210

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Marketing Excellence

>>GE

General Electric (GE) is made
up of five major divisions that operate in a wide range of
industries: Energy (Energy, Oil & Gas, Water and Process
Technologies), Technology Infrastructure (Aviation,
Enterprise Solutions, Healthcare, Transportation), GE
Capital (Commercial Lending & Leasing, Consumer
Financing, Energy Financial Services, GE Capital Aviation
Services, Real Estate Financing), NBC Commercial
(Cable, Film, Networks, Parks & Resorts), and Consumer
& Industrial (Appliances, Consumer Electronics, Electrical
Distribution, Lighting). As a result, GE sells a diverse array
of products and services from home appliances to jet engines, security systems, wind turbines, and financial
services. GE’s revenues topped $161 billion in 2009,
making it so large that if each of its five business units
were ranked separately, they all would appear in the
Fortune 200. If GE were its own country, it would be the
50th largest in the world, ahead of Kuwait, New Zealand,
and Iraq.
Thomas Edison originally founded the company as the
Edison Electric Light Company in 1878. The company,
which soon changed its name to General Electric, became
an early pioneer in lightbulbs and electrical appliances and
served the electrical needs of various industries, such as
transportation, utilities, manufacturing, and broadcasting.
GE became the acknowledged pioneer in business-tobusiness marketing in the 1950s and 1960s under the
tagline “Progress Is Our Most Important Product.”
As the company diversified its business-to-business
product lines in the 1970s and 1980s, it created new
corporate campaigns, including “Progress for People”
and “We Bring Good Things to Life.” In 1981, Jack Welch
succeeded Reginald Jones as GE’s eighth CEO. Over
Welch’s two decades of leadership, he helped grow GE
from an “American manufacturer into a global services

giant,” and increased the company’s market value from
$12 billion in 1981 to $280 billion in 2001, making it the
world’s most valuable corporation at the time.
In 2003, GE and the company’s new CEO, Jeffrey
Immelt, faced a fresh challenge; how to promote its diversified brand with a unified global message. After extensive
consumer research, the company launched a major new
campaign called “Imagination at Work,” which highlighted
its renewed focus on innovation and new technology. The
award-winning campaign promoted units such as GE
Aircraft Engines, GE Medical Systems, and GE Plastics,
focusing on the breadth of GE’s product offerings. GE initially spent over $150 million on corporate advertising, a
significant expenditure but one that created efficiencies by
focusing on the core GE brand. The goal was to unify
these divisions under the GE brand while giving them a
voice. “When you’re a company like ours, with 11 different businesses, brand is really important in pulling the
identity of the company together,” said former Chief
Marketing Officer Beth Comstock. “Integration was important in communicating the brand across the organization and to all of our constituents.”
The new integrated campaign got results. “Research
indicates GE is now being associated with attributes such
as being high tech, leading edge, innovative, contemporary, and creative,” stated Judy Hu, GE’s general manager
for global advertising and branding. In addition, survey
respondents continued to associate GE with some of its
traditional attributes, including trust and reliability.
In 2005, the company extended the campaign with its
next initiative, “Ecomagination,” which highlighted the company’s efforts to develop environmentally friendly “green”
technologies such as solar energy, lower-emission engines,
and water purification technologies. The company leveraged the “Imagination” tagline again with a 2006 campaign
called “Health Care Re-Imagined” that featured innovative
GE health care products for detecting, preventing, and
curing diseases.
Immelt made some strategic restructuring decisions
that helped the company survive the worldwide recession
of 2008 and 2009 and also helped shift it even more in the
B2B direction. GE moved from 11 divisions to 5 and sold
off some of its consumer-focused businesses, including
51 percent of NBC Universal (sold to Comcast). This shift
allowed GE to spend more resources on innovation,
green initiatives, and its growing businesses such as
power generation, aviation, medical-imaging, and cell
technologies. GE continued to use the Ecomagination
campaign and introduced “Healthymagination,” which
communicated its advances in medical technologies
around the world.
GE’s recent corporate campaigns have united its business units, but its success rests on its ability to understand

ANALYZING BUSINESS MARKETS

the business market and the business buying process, putting itself in the shoes of its business customers. Consider
its approach to pricing its aircraft engines. GE knows that
purchasing an aircraft engine is a multimillion-dollar expenditure, and one that doesn’t end with the purchase.
Customers (the airlines) face substantial maintenance costs
to meet FAA guidelines and ensure reliability of the engines.
So in 1999, GE pioneered a new pricing option called
“Power by the Hour.” This concept gives customers an
opportunity to pay a fixed fee each time they run the
engine. In return, GE performs all the maintenance and
guarantees the engine’s reliability. When demand for air
travel is uncertain, “Power by the Hour” provides GE’s
customers with a lower cost of ownership.
This kind of B-to-B marketing savvy has helped GE
cement its top position in the Financial Times’s “World’s
Most Respected Companies” survey for years. Its understanding of the business markets, its way of doing
business, and its brand marketing have kept GE’s brand

| CHAPTER 7

211

equity growing. Indeed, its brand equity was ranked
fourth and valued at $48 billion in the 2009 Interbrand/
BusinessWeek ranking of the “Top 100 Global Brands.”
“The GE brand is what connects us all and makes us so
much better than the parts,” Chief Marketing Officer
Comstock said.
Questions
1. Discuss the importance of B-to-B marketing and a
strong B-to-B brand to GE.
2. Have “Imagination at Work,” “Ecomagination,” and
“Healthymagination” successfully communicated GE’s
focus on its newer endeavors? Why or why not?
Sources: Geoffrey Colvin, “What Makes GE Great?” Fortune, March 6, 2006, pp. 90–104; Thomas
A. Stewart, “Growth as a Process,” Harvard Business Review, June 2006, pp. 60–70; Kathryn
Kranhold, “The Immelt Era, Five Years Old, Transforms GE,” Wall Street Journal, September 11,
2006; Daniel Fisher, “GE Turns Green,” Forbes, August 15, 2005, pp. 80– 85; John A. Byrne, “Jeff
Immelt,” Fast Company, July 2005, pp. 60–65; Rachel Layne, “GE’s NBC Sale Brings Immelt Cash,
Scrutiny,” BusinessWeek, December 3, 2009.

212

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What are the different levels of
market segmentation?
2. In what ways can a company
divide a market into segments?
3. What are the requirements for
effective segmentation?
4. How should business markets
be segmented?
5. How should a company choose
the most attractive target
markets?

Club Med has gone upscale to target new
market segments.

8

Identifying Market
Segments and Targets
Companies cannot connect with all customers in large, broad, or diverse
markets. But they can divide such markets into groups of consumers or segments with distinct
needs and wants. A company then needs to identify which market segments it can serve effectively. This decision requires a keen understanding of consumer behavior and careful strategic
thinking. To develop the best marketing plans, managers need to understand what makes each
segment unique and different. Identifying and satisfying the right market segments is often the
key to marketing success.

One of the most famous leisure travel brands in the world, France’s Club
Méditerranée, better known as Club Med, has targeted several different customer
groups through the years. Started in 1950 and long a pioneer in the concept of the
all-inclusive resort, Club Med originally used exotic locations, bare-bones accommodations, and the advertising theme “The antidote to civilization” to target singles,
young couples, and others seeking sea, sand, and a good time. Rooms did not have phones, TVs,
fans, or locks on the doors. To transcend its hedonistic image and broaden its clientele, Club Med
decided to add family-friendly resort locations and services in the 1970s. Depending on location,
the resorts, known as villages, offer a wide range of activities, from flying-trapeze clinics to body
building to snow skiing. Club Med staff are called “GOs,” or Gentil
Organisateurs (“gracious/nice organizers”); clients are called To compete more effectively, many companies are now
“GMs,” or Gentils Membres (“gracious/nice guests/members”). An embracing target marketing. Instead of scattering their marketing
informal atmosphere has GOs and GMs dining, drinking, dancing, efforts, they’re focusing on those consumers they have the
greatest chance of satisfying.
and playing together.
Effective target marketing requires that marketers:
An attempt to move outside the leisure-travel business to become
a broader services company proved ill-fated; a series of urban 1. Identify and profile distinct groups of buyers who differ in
bar/restaurants flopped. Combined with a post-9/11 economic retheir needs and wants (market segmentation).
cession and increased competition, the failure left Club Med reeling 2. Select one or more market segments to enter (market
in 2001–2002. Under the new leadership of Henri Giscard d’Estaing
targeting).
(son of the former president of France), the company invested hun- 3. For each target segment, establish and communicate the
distinctive benefit(s) of the company’s market offering
dreds of millions of dollars to move upscale and attract wealthier
(market positioning).
customers by crafting a more sophisticated image. For the firm’s
60th anniversary in 2010, advertising proclaimed that Club Med was This chapter will focus on the first two steps. After reviewing
“Where Happiness Means the World,” which was backed by an some important branding concepts in Chapter 9, Chapter 10
extensive online marketing effort.1
discusses the third step, market positioning.

213

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Bases for Segmenting
Consumer Markets
Market segmentation divides a market into well-defined slices. A market segment consists of a
group of customers who share a similar set of needs and wants. The marketer’s task is to identify
the appropriate number and nature of market segments and decide which one(s) to target.
We use two broad groups of variables to segment consumer markets. Some researchers try to
define segments by looking at descriptive characteristics: geographic, demographic, and psychographic. Then they examine whether these customer segments exhibit different needs or product
responses. For example, they might examine the differing attitudes of “professionals,”“blue collars,”
and other groups toward, say, “safety” as a product benefit.
Other researchers try to define segments by looking at behavioral considerations, such as consumer responses to benefits, usage occasions, or brands. The researcher then sees whether different
characteristics are associated with each consumer-response segment. For example, do people who
want “quality” rather than “low price” in an automobile differ in their geographic, demographic,
and psychographic makeup?
Regardless of which type of segmentation scheme we use, the key is adjusting the marketing
program to recognize customer differences. The major segmentation variables—geographic,
demographic, psychographic, and behavioral segmentation—are summarized in
Table 8.1.

Geographic Segmentation
Geographic segmentation divides the market into geographical units such as nations, states,
regions, counties, cities, or neighborhoods. The company can operate in one or a few areas, or it can
operate in all but pay attention to local variations. In that way it can tailor marketing programs to
the needs and wants of local customer groups in trading areas, neighborhoods, even individual
stores. In a growing trend called grassroots marketing, such activities concentrate on getting as close
and personally relevant to individual customers as possible.
Much of Nike’s initial success comes from engaging target consumers through grassroots marketing efforts such as sponsorship of local school teams, expert-conducted clinics, and provision of
shoes, clothing, and equipment. Citibank provides different mixes of banking services in its
branches depending on neighborhood demographics. Curves, an exercise chain aimed at middleaged women, places paper bags where consumers can place a form asking for more information
about Curves in local businesses such as ice cream shops, pizza parlors, and other places where guilt
can strike the weight-conscious shopper. Retail firms such as Starbucks, Costco, Trader Joe’s, and
REI have all found great success emphasizing local marketing initiatives, but other types of firms
have also jumped into action.2

Bed Bath &
Beyond

214

Bed Bath & Beyond

Home furnishing retailer Bed Bath & Beyond’s ability
to cater to local tastes has fueled its phenomenal growth. The firm’s managers pick 70 percent
of their own merchandise, and this fierce local focus has helped the chain evolve from bed linens
to the “beyond” part—products from picture frames and pot holders to imported olive oil and
designer doormats. In Manhattan stores, for instance, managers are beginning to stock wall
paint. You won’t find paint in suburban stores, where customers can go to Home Depot or Lowe’s. One manager says several customers have been surprised to find out the store is part of a national chain and not a
mom-and-pop operation. For Bed Bath & Beyond, that’s the ultimate compliment.3
More and more, regional marketing means marketing right down to a specific zip code.4
Many companies use mapping software to pinpoint the geographic locations of their customers, learning, say, that most customers are within a 10-mile radius of the store and are further concentrated within certain zip+4 areas. By mapping the densest areas, the retailer can
rely on customer cloning, assuming the best prospects live where most of the customers already
come from.

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

TABLE 8.1

| CHAPTER 8

Major Segmentation Variables for Consumer Markets

Geographic region

Pacific Mountain, West North Central, West South Central, East North Central, East South Central,
South Atlantic, Middle Atlantic, New England

City or metro size

Under 5,000; 5,000–20,000; 20,000–50,000; 50,000–100,000; 100,000–250,000; 250,000–500,000;
500,000–1,000,000; 1,000,000–4,000,000; 4,000,000+

Density

Urban, suburban, rural

Climate

Northern, southern

Demographic age

Under 6, 6–11, 12–17, 18–34, 35–49, 50–64, 64+

Family size

1–2, 3–4, 5+

Family life cycle

Young, single; young, married, no children; young, married, youngest child under 6; young; married, youngest
child 6 or older; older, married, with children; older, married, no children under 18; older, single; other

Gender

Male, female

Income

Under $10,000; $10,000–$15,000; $15,000–$20,000; $20,000–$30,000; $30,000–$50,000;
$50,000–$100,000; $100,000+

Occupation

Professional and technical; managers, officials, and proprietors; clerical sales; craftspeople; forepersons;
operatives; farmers; retired; students; homemakers; unemployed

Education

Grade school or less; some high school; high school graduate; some college; college graduate

Religion

Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, other

Race

White, Black, Asian, Hispanic

Generation

Silent Generation, Baby boomers, Gen X, Gen Y

Nationality

North American, Latin American, British, French, German, Italian, Chinese, Indian, Japanese

Social class

Lower lowers, upper lowers, working class, middle class, upper middles, lower uppers, upper uppers

Psychographic lifestyle

Culture-oriented, sports-oriented, outdoor-oriented

Personality

Compulsive, gregarious, authoritarian, ambitious

Behavioral occasions

Regular occasion, special occasion

Benefits

Quality, service, economy, speed

User status

Nonuser, ex-user, potential user, first-time user, regular user

Usage rate

Light user, medium user, heavy user

Loyalty status

None, medium, strong, absolute

Readiness stage

Unaware, aware, informed interested, desirous, intending to buy

Attitude toward product

Enthusiastic, positive, indifferent, negative, hostile

Some approaches combine geographic data with demographic data to yield even richer descriptions of consumers and neighborhoods. Nielsen Claritas has developed a geoclustering approach
called PRIZM (Potential Rating Index by Zip Markets) NE that classifies over half a million U.S. residential neighborhoods into 14 distinct groups and 66 distinct lifestyle segments called PRIZM
Clusters.5 The groupings take into consideration 39 factors in five broad categories: (1) education
and affluence, (2) family life cycle, (3) urbanization, (4) race and ethnicity, and (5) mobility. The
neighborhoods are broken down by zip code, zip+4, or census tract and block group. The clusters
have descriptive titles such as Blue Blood Estates, Winner’s Circle, Hometown Retired, Shotguns and
Pickups, and Back Country Folks. The inhabitants in a cluster tend to lead similar lives, drive similar
cars, have similar jobs, and read similar magazines.
Table 8.2 has examples of four PRIZM clusters.
Marketers can use PRIZM to answer questions such as: Which geographic areas (neighborhoods
or zip codes) contain our most valuable customers? How deeply have we already penetrated these
segments? Which distribution channels and promotional media work best in reaching our target
clusters in each area? Geoclustering captures the increasing diversity of the U.S. population.

215

216

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

TABLE 8.2

Examples of PRIZM clusters

• Young Digerati. Young Digerati are the nation’s tech-savvy singles and couples living in fashionable neighborhoods on the urban fringe. Affluent, highly educated, and ethnically mixed, they live
in areas typically filled with trendy apartments and condos, fitness clubs and clothing boutiques,
casual restaurants, and all types of bars—from juice to coffee to microbrew.
• Beltway Boomers. One segment of the huge baby boomer cohort—college-educated, uppermiddle-class, and home-owning—is Beltway Boomers. Like many of their peers who married
late, these boomers are still raising children in comfortable suburban subdivisions and pursuing
kid-centered lifestyles.
• The Cosmopolitans. Educated, midscale, and multiethnic, The Cosmopolitans are urbane
couples in America’s fast-growing cities. Concentrated in a handful of metros—such as Las
Vegas, Miami, and Albuquerque—these households feature older home owners, empty nesters,
and college graduates. A vibrant social scene surrounds their older homes and apartments,
and residents love the nightlife and enjoy leisure-intensive lifestyles.
• Old Milltowns. Once-thriving mining and manufacturing towns have aged—as have the
residents in Old Milltowns communities. Today, the majority of residents are retired singles and
couples, living on downscaled incomes in pre-1960 homes and apartments. For leisure, they
enjoy gardening, sewing, socializing at veterans clubs, and eating out at casual restaurants.
Source: Nielsen, www.claritas.com.

A number of organizations have applied this service to their marketing. The U.S. Army uses
a custom Claritas system to help in recruiting. Sodexho Marriott uses a system to select menu
offerings for its nationwide college food program. Wendy’s and PETCO rely on Claritas to help
decide where to put new stores. When Ace Hardware launched a customer loyalty program
called the Helpful Hardware Club a few years ago, it assigned a Claritas cluster code to every one
of the 7 million members. When Ace found that 12 clusters generated most of its business, it
targeted them with specific promotions.6
Marketing to microsegments has become possible even for small organizations as database costs
decline, software becomes easier to use, and data integration increases.7 Those who favor such localized marketing see national advertising as wasteful because it is too “arm’s length” and fails to address
local needs. Those against local marketing argue that it drives up manufacturing and marketing costs
by reducing economies of scale and magnifying logistical problems. A brand’s overall image might be
diluted if the product and message are different in different localities.

Demographic Segmentation
In demographic segmentation, we divide the market on variables such as age, family size, family life
cycle, gender, income, occupation, education, religion, race, generation, nationality, and social class.
One reason demographic variables are so popular with marketers is that they’re often associated
with consumer needs and wants. Another is that they’re easy to measure. Even when we describe the
target market in nondemographic terms (say, by personality type), we may need the link back to
demographic characteristics in order to estimate the size of the market and the media we should use
to reach it efficiently.
Here’s how marketers have used certain demographic variables to segment markets.

AGE AND LIFE-CYCLE STAGE Consumer wants and abilities change with age. Toothpaste
brands such as Crest and Colgate offer three main lines of products to target kids, adults, and
older consumers. Age segmentation can be even more refined. Pampers divides its market into
prenatal, new baby (0–5 months), baby (6–12 months), toddler (13–23 months), and
preschooler (24 months+). Indirect age effects also operate for some products. One study of kids
aged 8–12 found that 91 percent decided or influenced clothing or apparel buys, 79 percent
grocery purchases, and 54 percent vacation choices, while 14 percent even made or swayed
vehicle decisions.8

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

217

Nevertheless, age and life cycle can be tricky variables.9 The target
market for some products may be the psychologically young. To target
21-year-olds with its boxy Element, which company officials described
as a “dorm room on wheels,” Honda ran ads depicting sexy college kids
partying near the car at a beach. So many baby boomers were attracted
to the ads, however, that the average age of Element buyers turned out
to be 42! With baby boomers seeking to stay young, Honda decided
the lines between age groups were getting blurred. When it was ready
to launch a new subcompact called the Fit, the firm deliberately
targeted Gen Y buyers as well as their empty-nest parents.

LIFE STAGE People in the same part of the life cycle may still differ
in their life stage. Life stage defines a person’s major concern, such as
going through a divorce, going into a second marriage, taking care of
an older parent, deciding to cohabit with another person, deciding to
buy a new home, and so on. These life stages present opportunities
for marketers who can help people cope with their major concerns.
GENDER Men and women have different attitudes and behave
differently, based partly on genetic makeup and partly on
socialization.10 Women tend to be more communal-minded and men more self-expressive and
goal-directed; women tend to take in more of the data in their immediate environment and men to
focus on the part of the environment that helps them achieve a goal. A research study examining
how men and women shop found that men often need to be invited to touch a product, whereas
women are likely to pick it up without prompting. Men often like to read product information;
women may relate to a product on a more personal level.11
According to some studies, women in the United States and the United Kingdom control or
influence over 80 percent of consumer goods and services, make 75 percent of the decisions
about buying new homes, and purchase outright 60 percent of new cars. Gender differentiation
has long been applied in clothing, hairstyling, cosmetics, and magazines. Avon, for one, has built
a $6 billion–plus business selling beauty products to women. Marketers can now reach women
more easily via media like Lifetime, Oxygen, and WE television networks and scores of women’s
magazines and Web sites; men are more easily found at ESPN, Comedy Central, Fuel, and Spike
TV channels and through magazines such as Maxim and Men’s Health.12
Some traditionally more male-oriented markets, such as the automobile industry, are beginning
to recognize gender segmentation and changing the way they design and sell cars.13 Women shop
differently for cars than men; they are more interested in environmental impact, care more about
interior than exterior styling, and view safety in terms of features that help drivers survive an accident rather than help avoid one.14

Victoria’s Secret Victoria’s Secret, purchased by Limited Brands in 1982,
has become one of the most identifiable brands in retailing
through skillful marketing of women’s clothing, lingerie, and
beauty products. Most U.S. women a generation ago did their
underwear shopping in department stores and owned few
items that could be considered “lingerie.” After witnessing women buying
expensive lingerie as fashion items from small boutiques in Europe,
Limited Brands founder Leslie Wexner felt a similar store model could
work on a mass scale in the United States, though it was unlike anything
the average shopper would have encountered amid the bland racks at
department stores. Wexner, however, had reason to believe U.S. women
would relish the opportunity to have a European-style lingerie shopping
experience. “Women need underwear, but women want lingerie,” he
observed. Wexner’s assumption proved correct: A little more than a
decade after he bought the business, Victoria’s Secret’s average customer bought 8 to 10 bras per year, compared with the national average

Avon’s marketing is laser-focused
on women.

Lessons learned from its European
customers have helped Victoria’s
Secret to successfully target
women in North America and
other markets.

218

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

of two. To enhance its upscale reputation and glamorous appeal, the brand is endorsed by high-profile
supermodels in ads and fashion shows. Through the years, Victoria’s Secret has often delivered 25 percent
or more annual sales growth, selling through its stores, catalogs, and company Web site, and posted
$5.1 billion in revenues in 2008.15

INCOME Income segmentation is a long-standing practice in such categories as
automobiles, clothing, cosmetics, financial services, and travel. However, income does not
always predict the best customers for a given product. Blue-collar workers were among the first
purchasers of color television sets; it was cheaper for them to buy these sets than to go to
movies and restaurants.
Many marketers are deliberately going after lower-income groups, in some cases discovering
fewer competitive pressures or greater consumer loyalty.16 Procter & Gamble launched two
discount-priced brand extensions in 2005—Bounty Basic and Charmin Basic—whose success led
to the introduction in 2009 of Tide Basic, although this extension was later withdrawn from the
market. At the same time other marketers are finding success with premium-priced products.
When Whirlpool launched a pricey Duet washer line, sales doubled their forecasts in a weak
economy, due primarily to middle-class shoppers who traded up.
Increasingly, companies are finding their markets are hourglass shaped as middle-market U.S.
consumers migrate toward both discount and premium products.17 Companies that miss out on
this new market risk being “trapped in the middle” and seeing their market share steadily decline.
Recognizing that its channel strategy emphasized retailers like Sears selling primarily to the middle
class, Levi-Strauss introduced premium lines such as Levi’s Capital E to upscale retailers
Bloomingdales and Nordstrom, and the less-expensive Signature by Levi Strauss & Co. line to mass
market retailers Walmart and Target. “Marketing Insight: Trading Up, Down, and Over” describes
the factors creating this trend and what it means to marketers.

Marketing Insight
Trading Up, Down, and Over
Michael Silverstein and Neil Fiske, the authors of Trading Up, observed
an increasing number of middle-market consumers periodically trading
up to what they call “New Luxury” products and services “that possess
higher levels of quality, taste, and aspiration than other goods in the
category but are not so expensive as to be out of reach.” For example,
consumers might trade up to such brands as Starbucks coffee, Aveda
shampoo, or Viking ranges, depending in part on the emotional benefits
they gain in the trade.
Thanks to the trading-up trend, New Luxury goods sell at higher
volumes than traditional luxury goods, although priced higher than conventional middle-market items. The authors identify three main types of
New Luxury products:
• Accessible superpremium products, such as Victoria’s Secret
underwear and Kettle gourmet potato chips, carry a significant
premium over middle-market brands, yet consumers can readily
trade up to them because they are relatively low-ticket items in
affordable categories.

•

Old Luxury brand extensions extend historically high-priced brands
down-market while retaining their cachet, such as the MercedesBenz C-class and the American Express Blue card.

•

Masstige goods, such as Kiehl’s skin care and Kendall-Jackson
wines, are priced between average middle-market brands and
superpremium Old Luxury brands. They are “always based on
emotions, and consumers have a much stronger emotional
engagement with them than with other goods.”

To trade up to brands that offer these emotional benefits, consumers
often “trade down” by shopping at discounters such as Walmart and
Costco for staple items or goods that confer no emotional benefit but still
deliver quality and functionality. As one consumer explained in rationalizing
why her kitchen boasted a Sub-Zero refrigerator, a state-of-the-art Fisher &
Paykel dishwasher, and a $900 warming drawer but a giant 12-pack of
Bounty paper towels from a warehouse discounter: “When it comes to this
house, I didn’t give in on anything. But when it comes to food shopping or
cleaning products, if it’s not on sale, I won’t buy it.”
In a subsequent book titled Treasure Hunt, Silverstein notes that
82 percent of U.S. consumers trade down in five or more categories
(what he calls “treasure hunting”), whereas 62 percent focus on trading
up in the two categories that provide the most emotional benefits. This
makes the new consumer “part martyr and part hedonist,” willingly
sacrificing on a number of purchases in order to experience enhanced
benefits from a handful of others.
Silverstein believes successful firms will offer one of two kinds of
value: New Luxury or Treasure Hunting. Brands that offer opportunities
to trade up, such as Coach, Victoria’s Secret, Grey Goose, and Bath &

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

Body Works, or to trade down, such as Best Value Inn, Kohl’s, Dollar
General, and IKEA, are optimally positioned to deliver the value modern
consumers seek. The remaining firms, occupying the middle market and
lacking the economic, functional, and emotional value modern consumers are searching for, will see their market share shrink as they get
“trapped in the middle.” Traditional grocers and department stores are
already suffering, with market share declines of 30 percent and 50 percent, respectively.
Market research firm Mintel observes that consumers have also
been “trading over” by switching spending from one category to another, buying a new home theater system, say, instead of a new car. In
the recent economic downturn, consumers were “making substitutions

| CHAPTER 8

219

that work for recession-minded lifestyles” while still preserving a
desired experience. Mintel cites as examples Starbucks VIA Ready Brew
coffee, a new, home-based Starbucks experience that’s more affordable
than coffee at one of the company’s outlets, and Tide TOTALCARE,
which enables users to obtain certain dry-cleaning-type results at home
with prices below those of professional dry cleaners.
Sources: Michael J. Silverstein, Treasure Hunt: Inside the Mind of the New
Consumer (New York: Portfolio, 2006); Jeff Cioletti, “Movin’ on Up,” Beverage
World (June 2006), p. 20; Michael J. Silverstein and Neil Fiske, Trading Up: The New
American Luxury (New York: Portfolio, 2003); Linda Tischler, “The Price Is Right,”
Fast Company, November 2003; Sarah Mahoney, “Top Consumer Trends: Trust,
Control, . . . Playfulness,” Marketing Daily, September 4, 2009; David Orgel, “Quality
Trumps Quantity in New Product Releases,” Supermarket News, May 25, 2009.

PNC’s Virtual
Wallet

GENERATION Each generation or cohort is profoundly influenced by the times in which it
grows up—the music, movies, politics, and defining events of that period. Members share the same
major cultural, political, and economic experiences and have similar outlooks and values.
Marketers often advertise to a cohort by using the icons and images prominent in its experiences.
They also try to develop products and services that uniquely meet the particular interests or needs
of a generational target. Here is how one bank targeted Gen Y consumers.

PNC’s Virtual Wallet

In early 2007, PNC bank hired design consultants IDEO to study Gen Y—defined by PNC as 18- to 34-year-olds—and help develop a
marketing plan to appeal to them. IDEO’s research found this cohort (1) didn’t know how to
manage money and (2) found bank Web sites clunky and awkward to use. PNC thus chose
to introduce a new offering, Virtual Wallet, that combined three accounts—“Spend” (regular checking), “Reserve” (backup checking that garners interest), and “Grow” (savings)—with a slick
personal finance tool. Customers can drag money from account to account on one screen. Instead
of seeing a traditional ledger, they view balances on a calendar that displays estimated future cash
flow based on when they are paid, when they pay bills, and their spending habits. Customers also
can set a “Savings Engine” tool to transfer money to savings when they receive a paycheck and
get their account balances by text messages. Despite offering subscribers financial returns that
were nothing out of the ordinary, PNC was able to sign up 20,000 mostly Gen Y consumers within
the first few months.18
Although the beginning and ending birth dates of any generation are always subjective—
and generalizations can mask important differences within the group—here are some
general observations about the four main generation cohorts of consumers, from youngest
to oldest.19

Millennials (or Gen Y) Born between 1979 and 1994, Millennials, also called Gen Y,
number 78 million with annual spending power estimated at $187 billion. If you factor in
career growth and household and family formation, and multiply by another 53 years of life
expectancy, trillions of dollars in consumer spending are at stake over their life spans. It’s
not surprising that market researchers and advertisers are racing to get a bead on Gen Y’s
buying behavior.
Also known as the Echo Boomers, these consumers have been “wired” almost from birth—
playing computer games, navigating the Web, downloading music, connecting with friends via
instant messaging and mobile phones. They have a sense of entitlement and abundance from
growing up during the economic boom and being pampered by their boomer parents. Yet they
are highly socially conscious and concerned about environmental issues. They are selective,
confident, and impatient.

Consumers have been “trading
over” to Tide TOTALCARE to
obtain dry-cleaning type results
at home.

220

PART 3

TABLE 8.3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Profiling U.S. Generation Cohorts

Generational Cohort

Birth Range

Approximate Size

Defining Features

Millennials (Gen Y)

1979–1994

78 million

Raised with relative affluence, technologically plugged in and concerned
with the environment and social issues, they also have a strong sense of
independence and a perceived immunity from marketing.

Gen X

1964–1978

50 million

Sometimes seen as falling between the generational cracks, they bridge the
technological savvy of Gen Y with the adult realities of the baby boomers.

Baby Boomers

1946–1964

76 million

Still largely in the prime of their consumption cycle, they embrace products
and lifestyles that allow them to turn back the hands of time.

Silent Generation

1925–1945

42 million

Defying their advancing age, they maintain active lives and products and
marketing that help them to achieve that.

Sources: Kenneth Gronbach, “The 6 Markets You Need to Know Now,” Advertising Age, June 2, 2008, p. 21; Geoffrey E. Meredith and Charles D. Schewe, Managing by Defining Moments: America’s 7
Generational Cohorts, Their Workplace Values, and Why Managers Should Care (New York: Hungry Minds, 2002).

Because Gen Y members are often turned off by overt branding practices and “hard sell,” marketers have tried many different approaches to reach and persuade them.20
1.

2.

3.
4.

Hurley reinforces its strong
identification with Gen Y
consumers through its sponsorship
of the U.S. Open of Surfing.

Online buzz—Rock band Foo Fighters created a digital street team that sends targeted e-mail
blasts to members who “get the latest news, exclusive audio/video sneak previews, tons of
chances to win great Foo Fighters prizes, and become part of the Foo Fighters Family.”
Student ambassadors—Red Bull enlisted college students as Red Bull Student Brand
Managers to distribute samples, research drinking trends, design on-campus marketing initiatives, and write stories for student newspapers.
Unconventional sports—Chick-fil-A sponsored the National Amateur Dodgeball Association,
“a recreational pursuit for nontraditional sport enthusiasts.”
Cool events—Hurley, which defined itself as an authentic “Microphone for Youth” brand
rooted in surf, skate, art, music, and beach cultures, became the title sponsor of the U.S.
Open of Surfing. Other sponsors included Casio, Converse, Corona, Paul Mitchell, and
Southwest Airlines.

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

5.

6.
7.

| CHAPTER 8

221

Computer games—Product placement is not restricted to movies or TV:
Mountain Dew, Oakley, and Harley-Davidson all made deals to put logos on
Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 3 from Activision.
Videos—Burton ensures its snowboards and riders are clearly visible in any videos
that are shot.
Street teams—As part of an antismoking crusade, the American Legacy
Foundation hires teens as the “Truth Squad” to hand out T-shirts, bandanas, and
dog tags at teen-targeted events.

Gen X Often lost in the demographic shuffle, the 50 million or so Gen X
consumers, named for a 1991 novel by Douglas Coupland, were born between 1964
and 1978. The popularity of Kurt Cobain, rock band Nirvana, and the lifestyle
portrayed in the critically lauded film Slacker led to the use of terms like grunge and
slacker to characterize Gen X teens and young adults. It was an unflattering image of
a disaffected group with short attention spans and little work ethic.
These stereotypes slowly disappeared. Gen X was certainly raised in more challenging times, when working parents relied on day care or left “latchkey kids” on their own
after school, and corporate downsizing led to the threat of layoffs and economic uncertainty. At the same time, social and racial diversity were accepted and technology rapidly changed the way people lived and worked. Although Gen Xers created new norms
in educational achievement, they were also the first generation to find surpassing their
parents’ standard of living a serious challenge.
These realities had a profound impact. Gen Xers feel self-sufficiency and the ability
to handle any circumstance are key. Technology is an enabler for them, not a barrier.
Unlike the more optimistic, team-oriented Gen Yers, Gen Xers are more pragmatic
and individualistic. As consumers, they are wary of hype and pitches that seem inauthentic or patronizing. Direct appeals where value is clear often works best, especially
as Gen Xers become parents raising families.21
Baby Boomers Baby boomers are the approximately 76 million U.S. consumers born between
1946 and 1964. Though they represent a wealthy target, possessing $1.2 trillion in annual spending
power and controlling three-quarters of the country’s wealth, marketers often overlook them. In
network television circles, because advertisers are primarily interested in 18- to 49-year-olds,
viewers over 50 are referred to as “undesirables.”
With many baby boomers moving into their 60s and even the last and youngest wave bearing
down on 50, demand has exploded for products to turn back the hands of time. According to one
survey, nearly one in five boomers was actively resisting the aging process, driven by the mantra,
“Fifty is the new thirty.” As they search for the fountain of youth, sales of hair replacement and hair
coloring aids, health club memberships, home gym equipment, skin-tightening creams, nutritional
supplements, and organic foods have all soared.
Interestingly, because so many members of the Gen Y “Echo Boomers” are living with their
boomer parents, parents are being influenced by what demographers are calling a “boom-boom
effect.” The same products that appeal to 21-year-olds are appealing to youth-obsessed baby
boomers. The multiseason success of MTV’s reality show The Osbournes, starring heavy-metal
rocker Ozzy Osbourne and his family, was fueled as much by boomer parents as by their MTVloving kids.
Contrary to conventional marketing wisdom that brand preferences of consumers over 50 are
fixed, one study found 52 percent of boomers are willing to change brands, in line with the total
population. Although they love to buy things, they hate being sold to, and as one marketer noted,
“You have to earn your stripes every day.” But abundant opportunity exists. Boomers are also less
likely to associate retirement with “the beginning of the end” and see it instead as a new chapter in
their lives with new activities, interests, careers, or even relationships.22

Silent Generation Those born between 1925 and 1945—the “Silent Generation”—are redefining
what old age means. To start with, many people whose chronological age puts them in this category
don’t see themselves as old. One survey found that 60 percent of respondents over 65 said they felt
younger than their actual age. A third aged 65 to 74 said they felt 10 to 19 years younger, and one in
six felt at least 20 years younger than their actual age.23

Although some saw rock band
Nirvana as a defining symbol of
Gen X, subsequent portrayals
reveal a more complex picture of
this cohort.

222

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Consistent with what they say, many older consumers lead very active lives. As
one expert noted, it is if they were having a second middle age before becoming elderly. Advertisers have learned that older consumers don’t mind seeing other older
consumers in ads targeting them, as long as they appear to be leading vibrant lives.
But marketers have learned to avoid clichés like happy older couples riding bikes or
strolling hand-in-hand on a beach at sunset.
Emphasizing their roles as grandparents is universally well-received. Many
older consumers not only happily spend time with their grandkids, they often provide for their basic needs or at least occasional gifts. The founders of
eBeanstalk.com, which sells children’s learning toys online, thought their business
would be largely driven by young consumers starting families. They were surprised
to find that up to 40 percent of their customers were older consumers, mainly
grandparents. These customers are very demanding, but also more willing to pay
full price than their younger counterparts.24

RACE AND CULTURE Multicultural marketing is an approach recognizing

The hit reality show The
Osbournes tapped into baby
boomers’ rock-and-roll sensibilities
and their parental responsibilities.
Members of the oldest generation,
the Silent Generation, take
much pride in their roles as
grandparents.

that different ethnic and cultural segments have sufficiently different needs and
wants to require targeted marketing activities, and that a mass market approach is
not refined enough for the diversity of the marketplace. Consider that McDonald’s
now does 40 percent of its U.S. business with ethnic minorities. Its highly successful
“I’m Lovin’ It” campaign was rooted in hip-hop culture but has had an appeal that
transcended race and ethnicity.25
The Hispanic American, African American, and Asian American markets are all
growing at two to three times the rate of nonmulticultural populations, with numerous submarkets, and their buying power is expanding. Multicultural markets also
vary in whether they are first and second (or more) generation, and whether they are
immigrants or born and raised in the United States.
The norms, language nuances, buying habits, and business practices of multicultural markets
need to be factored into the initial formulation of a marketing strategy, rather than added as an
afterthought. All this diversity also has implications for marketing research; it takes careful sampling
to adequately profile target markets.26
Multicultural marketing can result in different marketing messages, media, channels, and
so on. Specialized media exists to reach virtually any cultural segment or minority group,
though some companies have struggled to provide financial and management support for fully
realized programs.
Fortunately, as countries become more culturally diverse, many marketing campaigns targeting a specific cultural group can spill over and positively influence others. An ad for Tide in which an African American man wearing a wedding ring was
drying his son off after a bath was well regarded by both African Americans and the
market as a whole.27 Boost Mobile has leveraged a shared interest in youth culture to
create a diverse customer base of young adults made up of 35 percent African
Americans, 27 percent Hispanic Americans, and 32 percent Caucasians.28
Next, we consider issues in the three largest multicultural markets—Hispanic
Americans, African Americans, and Asian Americans.
Table 8.4 lists some important facts and figures about them.29

Hispanic Americans Hispanic Americans have become the largest minority in
the country with annual purchasing power estimated to be more than $1 trillion in
2010. By 2020, 17 percent of Americans are projected to be of Hispanic origin.
The Hispanic American market holds a wide variety of subsegments, with roughly
two dozen nationalities including Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, Dominican, and
other Central and South American groups, and a mix of cultures, physical types, racial
backgrounds, and aspirations.30 To meet these divergent needs, Goya, the United
States’ largest Hispanic food company, sells 1,600 products ranging from bags of rice to
ready-to-eat, frozen empanadas. The company sells 38 varieties of beans alone.31
Although Hispanics suffered from greater unemployment and diminished disposable income in the recession, they were still an attractive target because they had
lower mortgage and credit card debt, two or more income earners, and a greater
propensity to buy advertised brands.32 Companies such as Johnson & Johnson,

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

TABLE 8.4

| CHAPTER 8

223

Multicultural Market Profile
Hispanic Americans

Asian Americans

African Americans

Estimated population—2007

46.9 million

15.2 million

40.7 million

Estimated population—2050

132.8 million

40.6 million

65.7 million

Number of minority-owned businesses in 2002

1.6 million

1.1 million

1.2 million

Revenue generated by minority-owned businesses in 2002

$222 billion

$326 billion

$89 billion

Median household income in 2007

$38,679

$66,103

$33,916

Poverty rate in 2007

21.5%

10.20%

24.50%

Percentage of those aged >25 with at least a high school
education in 2008

62%

86%

82%

1,100,000

277,751

2,400,000

Median age in 2008

27.7

35.4

30.3

Percent of population under 18 years old in 2008

34%

26%

30%

$863 billion

$847 billion

$509 billion

Number of veterans of U.S. armed forces

Buying power—2008
Sources: www.selig.uga.edu. and www.census.gov.

Verizon, and General Mills all significantly increased their advertising investment in the Hispanic
market during the last recession.

State Farm After trailing its main competitor for years, State Farm decided to
make its Hispanic American marketing a priority in 2008. The firm sponsored local Latino
community events, soccer matches, the Latin Music Awards, and Univision’s highly rated
Saturday night variety show, Sabádo Gigante. Perhaps State Farm’s most original marketing activity, however, was the support and sponsorship of a new band. Los Felinos de la
Noche (The Felines of the Night), as the six men (primarily Hispanic immigrants) are called, play the
percussion heavy pop-rock sound of Norteño or Northern Mexico regional music. With State Farm’s
support, the band recorded singles, shot music videos, and played live concerts to make a name for
themselves. State Farm, however, chose a subtle approach to its sponsorship. Although the band’s
Web site did not display the State Farm logo or contain marketing messages, the band did praise the
company for the opportunity it gave them in many of the posted interviews. The color red in the band’s uniforms was meant to tie in State
Farm’s familiar color. Targeting first-generation Hispanics with an emotional appeal showed that State Farm understood the needs of the
Hispanic community. Positively received, the campaign has been credited with helping to change opinions of that market.33
Hispanic Americans often share strong family values—several
generations may reside in one household—and strong roots to
their original country of origin. They have a need for respect,
brand loyalty, and a keen interest in product quality. Procter &
Gamble’s research revealed that Hispanic consumers believe “lo
barato sale caro” (“cheap can be expensive,” or in the English equivalent, “you get what you pay for”). P&G found Hispanic consumers
were so value-oriented they would even do their own product tests
at home. One woman was using different brands of tissues and
toilet paper in different rooms and bathrooms to see which her
family liked best.34

State Farm’s musical sponsorship
of the band Los Felinos de la
Noche reflects the company’s
increased emphasis on Hispanic
marketing.

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Marketers are reaching out to Hispanic Americans with targeted promotions, ads, and Web sites
but need to be careful to capture the nuances of cultural and market trends.35 The California Milk
Processor Board (CMPB) had to change its famed “got milk?” ad campaign when targeting the
Hispanic market.

Got Milk?

224

Got Milk? In 2001, Hispanics represented 32.5 percent of California’s total

population, a number that was growing every year. They were also heavy milk drinkers, spending
more on milk than any other demographic segment. Initial consumer testing of the “got milk?”
ads revealed, however, that Spanish-speaking households did not find the commercials funny
when translated directly to Spanish. As CMPB Executive Director Jeff Manning explained, “We
found out that not having milk or rice in Hispanic households is not funny: running out of milk means you
failed your family.” In addition, “got milk?” translated in Spanish roughly means “Are you lactating?”
As a result, the CMPB and its Hispanic ad agency, Anita Santiago Advertising, created a series of ads
focused on milk as a sacred ingredient, often using the tagline “Familia, Amor y Leche” (Family, Love, and
Milk). When the campaign did use the “Got Milk?” tagline, it was left untranslated. Awareness rose among
the Hispanic population, and in 2002 the CMPB tested its first Spanish-language television spot, featuring
La Llorona, a mythical Hispanic character. Hispanic consumers were thrilled that the commercial understood
their culture and targeted them specifically.36
U.S.-born Hispanic Americans also have different needs and tastes than their foreign-born
counterparts and, though bilingual, often prefer to communicate in English. With two-thirds of
U.S. Hispanics considered “bicultural” and comfortable with both Spanish- and English-speaking cultures, most firms choose not to risk alienating the English-speaking audience on national
TV and to run Spanish-only ads just on Hispanic networks Univision, Telemundo, and
Telefutura.
Some marketers such as General Motors and Toyota have used a “Spanglish” approach in their
ads, mixing some Spanish naturally in with English in conversations among Hispanic families.37
Companies such as Continental Airlines, General Mills, and Sears have recently been using mobile
marketing to reach Hispanics.38 With a mostly younger population and less access to Internet or
landline service, Hispanics are much more likely to consume content on their cell phones than the
general market.

African Americans African Americans have had a significant economic, social, and cultural
impact on U.S. life, influencing inventions, art, music, sports, fashion, and literature. Like many
cultural segments, they are deeply rooted in the U.S. landscape while also proud of their heritage
and respectful of family ties.39
Based on survey findings, African Americans are the most fashion-conscious of all racial and
ethnic groups but strongly motivated by quality and selection. They’re also more likely to be influenced by their children when selecting a product for purchase, and less likely to buy unfamiliar
brands. African Americans watch television and listen to the radio more than other groups, and
they buy more DVDs than any other multicultural segment except Hispanics.40
Many companies have successfully tailored products to meet the needs of African Americans. In
1987, Hallmark Cards launched its African American–targeted Mahogany line with only 16 greeting
cards; today it offers 800 cards and a line of stationery. Sara Lee Corporation’s L’eggs discontinued its
separate line of pantyhose for black women; now shades and styles popular among black women
make up half the company’s general-focus sub-brands.
Ad messages must also be seen as relevant. In a campaign for Lawry’s Seasoned Salt targeting
African Americans, images of soul food appeared; a campaign for Kentucky Fried Chicken showed
an African American family gathered at a reunion—demonstrating an understanding of both the
market’s values and its lifestyle.41
Cigarette, liquor, and fast-food firms have been criticized for targeting urban African
Americans. As one writer noted, with obesity a problem, it is disturbing that it is easier to find a
fast-food restaurant than a grocery store in many black neighborhoods.42
Asian Americans According to the U.S. Census Bureau, “Asian” refers to people having origins in
any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent. Six countries
represent 79 percent of the Asian American population: China (21 percent), the Philippines

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

225

(18 percent), India (11 percent), Vietnam (10 percent), Korea (10 percent), and Japan (9 percent).
The diversity of these national identities limits the effectiveness of pan-Asian marketing appeals.
The Asian American market has been called the “invisible market” because, compared to
Hispanic Americans and African Americans, it has traditionally received a disproportionally small
fraction of U.S. companies’ total multicultural marketing expenditure.43 Yet it is getting easier and
easier to reach this market. The number of media outlets targeting Asian Americans has grown
from 200 in the 1980s to between 700 and 800 by 2007.
Philadelphia-based Sovereign Bank has been successful targeting Boston’s Chinese American
community with a 100 percent Chinese American–staffed branch. Not only do employees speak
Cantonese, they know that in financial planning for Chinese Americans it is appropriate to
acknowledge the need to care for elderly parents.44 Traditional packaged-good firms have also been
getting in the act. Here is how Kraft got its start.

Kraft Kraft’s initial Asian American marketing efforts began in 2005 with an integrated
marketing campaign featuring in-language ads, in-store product demos/tastings, and a Web
site with recipes and tips for healthy living. Kraft’s research revealed that Asian American
shoppers did not want more Asian-style products from Kraft. Rather, they wanted to learn how
to prepare Western-style meals using Kraft products. Kraft’s marketing communications used
Mandarin and Cantonese, two of the more commonly spoken dialects of Asian immigrants,
and targeted immigrant moms as the cultural gatekeepers of their families at home, striking a balance between Western and Eastern cultures. One print ad used the Chinese
proverb “Life has a hundred flavors” to show an array of Kraft products brightly arranged on
a platter. To further connect with shoppers, Kraft deployed Chinese-speaking representatives to supermarkets. The reps conducted cooking demos of Western recipes using Kraft
products, handed out product samples, and offered suggestions for convenient kid-friendly
school lunches. Kraft also launched a Web site (www.krafthealthyliving.com) to promote
tips for healthy eating, such as “sip your tea” for better health benefits.45
Asian Americans tend to be more brand-conscious than other minority groups
yet are the least loyal to particular brands. They also tend to care more about what
others think (for instance, whether their neighbors will approve of them) and share
core values of safety and education. Comparatively affluent and well-educated, they
are an attractive target for luxury brands. The most computer-literate group, Asian
Americans are more likely to use the Internet on a daily basis.46

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) The lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) market is estimated to make up 5 percent to
10 percent of the population and have approximately $700 billion in buying
power.47 Many firms have recently created initiatives to target this market.
American Airlines created a Rainbow Team with a dedicated LGBT staff and Web
site that has emphasized community-relevant services such as an event calendar of
gay-themed national events. According to one survey of the gay and lesbian community, Absolut,
Apple, Levi’s, and Bravo and Showtime television networks are seen as among the most
gay-friendly businesses.48
Logo, MTV’s television channel for a gay and lesbian audience, has 150 advertisers in a wide variety of product categories and is available in 40 million homes. Increasingly, advertisers are using
digital efforts to reach the market. Hyatt’s online appeals to the LGBT community targets social
sites and blogs where customers share their travel experiences.
Some firms, however, worry about backlash from organizations that will criticize or even boycott firms supporting gay and lesbian causes. Although Pepsi, Campbell’s, and Wells Fargo have all
experienced such boycotts, they continue to advertise to the gay community.

Psychographic Segmentation
Psychographics is the science of using psychology and demographics to better understand consumers. In psychographic segmentation, buyers are divided into different groups on the basis of

Kraft has actively targeted Asian
Americans with its brands and
products.

226

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

|Fig. 8.1|

The VALS
Segmentation System:
An Eight-Part
Typology

VALSTM Framework

Innovators
High Resources
High Innovation

Primary
Motivation
Ideals

Achievement

Self-Expression

Thinkers

Achievers

Experiencers

Believers

Strivers

Makers

Source: VALS™ © Strategic Business Insights (SBI),
www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/VALS. Used with
permission.

Low Resources
Low Innovation
Survivors

psychological/personality traits, lifestyle, or values. People within the same demographic group
can exhibit very different psychographic profiles.
One of the most popular commercially available classification systems based on psychographic
measurements is Strategic Business Insight’s (SBI) VALS™ framework. VALS, signifying values and
lifestyles, classifies U.S. adults into eight primary groups based on responses to a questionnaire featuring 4 demographic and 35 attitudinal questions. The VALS system is continually updated with
new data from more than 80,000 surveys per year (see
Figure 8.1). You can find out which
VALS type you are by going to the SBI Web site.49
The main dimensions of the VALS segmentation framework are consumer motivation (the
horizontal dimension) and consumer resources (the vertical dimension). Consumers are inspired by one of three primary motivations: ideals, achievement, and self-expression. Those
primarily motivated by ideals are guided by knowledge and principles. Those motivated by
achievement look for products and services that demonstrate success to their peers. Consumers
whose motivation is self-expression desire social or physical activity, variety, and risk. Personality
traits such as energy, self-confidence, intellectualism, novelty seeking, innovativeness, impulsiveness, leadership, and vanity—in conjunction with key demographics—determine an individual’s
resources. Different levels of resources enhance or constrain a person’s expression of his or her
primary motivation.
The four groups with higher resources are:
1.

2.
3.
4.

Innovators—Successful, sophisticated, active, “take-charge” people with high self-esteem.
Purchases often reflect cultivated tastes for relatively upscale, niche-oriented products
and services.
Thinkers—Mature, satisfied, and reflective people motivated by ideals and who value order,
knowledge, and responsibility. They seek durability, functionality, and value in products.
Achievers—Successful, goal-oriented people who focus on career and family. They favor
premium products that demonstrate success to their peers.
Experiencers—Young, enthusiastic, impulsive people who seek variety and excitement.
They spend a comparatively high proportion of income on fashion, entertainment, and
socializing.

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

227

The four groups with lower resources are:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Believers—Conservative, conventional, and traditional people with concrete beliefs. They prefer familiar, U.S.-made products and are loyal to established brands.
Strivers—Trendy and fun-loving people who are resource-constrained. They favor stylish
products that emulate the purchases of those with greater material wealth.
Makers—Practical, down-to-earth, self-sufficient people who like to work with their hands.
They seek U.S.-made products with a practical or functional purpose.
Survivors—Elderly, passive people concerned about change and loyal to their favorite brands.

Marketers can apply their understanding of VALS segments to marketing planning. For example,
Transport Canada, the agency that operates major Canadian airports, found that Actualizers, who
desire to express independence and taste, made up a disproportionate percentage of air travelers.
Given that segment’s profile, stores such as Sharper Image and Nature Company were expected to
do well in the firm’s airports.
Psychographic segmentation schemes are often customized by culture. The Japanese version of
VALS, Japan VALS™, divides society into 10 consumer segments on the basis of two key concepts:
life orientation (traditional ways, occupations, innovation, and self-expression) and attitudes to
social change (sustaining, pragmatic, adapting, and innovating).

Behavioral Segmentation
In behavioral segmentation, marketers divide buyers into groups on the basis of their knowledge
of, attitude toward, use of, or response to a product.

NEEDS AND BENEFITS Not everyone who buys a product has the same needs or wants the
same benefits from it. Needs-based or benefit-based segmentation is a widely used approach because
it identifies distinct market segments with clear marketing implications. Constellation Brands
identified six different benefit segments in the U.S. premium wine market ($5.50 a bottle and up).50
•
•

•
•

•
•

Enthusiast (12 percent of the market). Skewing female, their average income is about $76,000
a year. About 3 percent are “luxury enthusiasts” who skew more male with a higher income.
Image Seekers (20 percent). The only segment that skews male, with an average age of 35.
They use wine basically as a badge to say who they are, and they’re willing to pay more to make
sure they’re getting the right bottle.
Savvy Shoppers (15 percent). They love to shop and believe they don’t have to spend a lot to
get a good bottle of wine. Happy to use the bargain bin.
Traditionalist (16 percent). With very traditional values, they like to buy brands they’ve heard
of and from wineries that have been around a long time. Their average age is 50 and they are
68 percent female.
Satisfied Sippers (14 percent). Not knowing much about wine, they tend to buy the same
brands. About half of what they drink is white zinfandel.
Overwhelmed (23 percent). A potentially attractive target market, they find purchasing wine
confusing.

DECISION ROLES It’s easy to identify the buyer for many
products. In the United States, men normally choose their shaving
equipment and women choose their pantyhose; but even here
marketers must be careful in making targeting decisions, because
buying roles change. When ICI, the giant British chemical
company, discovered that women made 60 percent of decisions on
the brand of household paint, it decided to advertise its Dulux
brand to women.
People play five roles in a buying decision: Initiator, Influencer,
Decider, Buyer, and User. For example, assume a wife initiates a
purchase by requesting a new treadmill for her birthday. The husband may then seek information from many sources, including his
best friend who has a treadmill and is a key influencer in what
models to consider. After presenting the alternative choices to his
wife, he purchases her preferred model, which ends up being used

Constellation Brands has adopted
a needs-based market segmentation
plan to sell its premium wines.

228

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

by the entire family. Different people are playing different roles, but all are crucial in the decision
process and ultimate consumer satisfaction.

USER AND USAGE—REAL USER AND USAGE-RELATED VARIABLES Many marketers
believe variables related to various aspects of users or their usage—occasions, user status, usage rate,
buyer-readiness stage, and loyalty status—are good starting points for constructing market segments.

Occasions Occasions mark a time of day, week, month, year, or other well-defined temporal
aspects of a consumer’s life. We can distinguish buyers according to the occasions when they develop
a need, purchase a product, or use a product. For example, air travel is triggered by occasions related
to business, vacation, or family. Occasion segmentation can help expand product usage.

User Status Every product has its nonusers, ex-users, potential users, first-time users, and regular
users. Blood banks cannot rely only on regular donors to supply blood; they must also recruit new
first-time donors and contact ex-donors, each with a different marketing strategy. The key to
attracting potential users, or even possibly nonusers, is understanding the reasons they are not
using. Do they have deeply held attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors or just lack knowledge of the
product or brand benefits and usage?
Included in the potential-user group are consumers who will become users in connection with
some life stage or life event. Mothers-to-be are potential users who will turn into heavy users.
Producers of infant products and services learn their names and shower them with products and
ads to capture a share of their future purchases. Market-share leaders tend to focus on attracting
potential users because they have the most to gain. Smaller firms focus on trying to attract current
users away from the market leader.

Usage Rate We can segment markets into light, medium, and heavy product users. Heavy users are
often a small slice but account for a high percentage of total consumption. Heavy beer drinkers
account for 87 percent of beer consumption—almost seven times as much as light drinkers.
Marketers would rather attract one heavy user than several light users. A potential problem,
however, is that heavy users are often either extremely loyal to one brand or never loyal to any brand
and always looking for the lowest price. They also may have less room to expand their purchase and
consumption.
Buyer-Readiness Stage Some people are unaware of the product, some are aware, some are
informed, some are interested, some desire the product, and some intend to buy. To help
characterize how many people are at different stages and how well they have converted people from
one stage to another, marketers can employ a marketing funnel to break down the market into
different buyer-readiness stages.
The proportions of consumers at different stages make a big difference in designing the marketing
program. Suppose a health agency wants to encourage women to have an annual Pap test to detect
cervical cancer. At the beginning, most women may be unaware of the Pap test. The marketing effort
should go into awareness-building advertising using a simple message. Later, the advertising should
dramatize the benefits of the Pap test and the risks of not getting it. A special offer of a free health
examination might motivate women to actually sign up for the test.
Figure 8.2 displays a funnel for two hypothetical brands. Compared to Brand B, Brand A
performs poorly at converting one-time users to more recent users (only 46 percent convert for
Brand A compared to 61 percent for Brand B). Depending on the reasons consumers didn’t use
again, a marketing campaign could introduce more relevant products, find more accessible retail
outlets, or dispel rumors or incorrect beliefs consumers hold.

Loyalty Status Marketers usually envision four groups based on brand loyalty status:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Hard-core loyals—Consumers who buy only one brand all the time
Split loyals—Consumers who are loyal to two or three brands
Shifting loyals—Consumers who shift loyalty from one brand to another
Switchers—Consumers who show no loyalty to any brand51

A company can learn a great deal by analyzing degrees of brand loyalty: Hard-core loyals can
help identify the products’ strengths; split loyals can show the firm which brands are most competitive with its own; and by looking at customers dropping its brand, the company can learn
about its marketing weaknesses and attempt to correct them. One caution: What appear to be

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

229

|Fig. 8.2|
Brand A

96

63

97

Aware

76%

74

Ever Tried

67%

62%
29

Ever Tried

Aware

Brand B

46%

65%

Recent Trial

61%

50%

18

12

Occasional
User

Regular User

75%

71%
45

32

Recent Trial

Occasional
User

6
Most Often
Used

Example of Marketing
Funnel

62%
24

15

Regular User

Most Often
Used

brand-loyal purchase patterns may reflect habit, indifference, a low price, a high switching cost,
or the unavailability of other brands.

Attitude Five consumer attitudes about products are enthusiastic, positive, indifferent, negative,
and hostile. Door-to-door workers in a political campaign use attitude to determine how much
time to spend with each voter. They thank enthusiastic voters and remind them to vote, reinforce
those who are positively disposed, try to win the votes of indifferent voters, and spend no time
trying to change the attitudes of negative and hostile voters.
Multiple Bases Combining different behavioral bases can provide a more comprehensive and
cohesive view of a market and its segments.
Figure 8.3 depicts one possible way to break down
a target market by various behavioral segmentation bases.
|Fig. 8.3|

Target Market

Behavioral
Segmentation
Breakdown
Unaware

Aware

Not tried

Negative
opinion

Neutral

Tried

Favorable
opinion

Rejector

Not yet
repeated

Repeated

Loyal to
other brand

Switcher

Loyal to
brand

Light
user

Regular
user

Heavy
user

230

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Bases for Segmenting Business
Markets
We can segment business markets with some of the same variables we use in consumer markets,
such as geography, benefits sought, and usage rate, but business marketers also use other variables.
Table 8.5 shows one set of these. The demographic variables are the most important, followed
by the operating variables—down to the personal characteristics of the buyer.
The table lists major questions that business marketers should ask in determining which
segments and customers to serve. A rubber-tire company can sell tires to manufacturers of
automobiles, trucks, farm tractors, forklift trucks, or aircraft. Within a chosen target industry,
it can further segment by company size and set up separate operations for selling to large and
small customers.
A company can segment further by purchase criteria. Government laboratories need low prices
and service contracts for scientific equipment, university laboratories need equipment that requires
little service, and industrial labs need equipment that is highly reliable and accurate.
Business marketers generally identify segments through a sequential process. Consider an aluminum company: The company first undertook macrosegmentation. It looked at which end-use
market to serve: automobile, residential, or beverage containers. It chose the residential market, and it
needed to determine the most attractive product application: semifinished material, building components, or aluminum mobile homes. Deciding to focus on building components, it considered the best
customer size and chose large customers. The second stage consisted of microsegmentation. The

TABLE 8.5

Major Segmentation Variables for Business Markets

Demographic
1. Industry: Which industries should we serve?
2. Company size: What size companies should we serve?
3. Location: What geographical areas should we serve?
Operating Variables
4. Technology: What customer technologies should we focus on?
5. User or nonuser status: Should we serve heavy users, medium users, light users, or nonusers?
6. Customer capabilities: Should we serve customers needing many or few services?
Purchasing Approaches
7. Purchasing-function organization: Should we serve companies with a highly centralized or decentralized purchasing organization?
8. Power structure: Should we serve companies that are engineering dominated, financially dominated, and so on?
9. Nature of existing relationship: Should we serve companies with which we have strong relationships or simply go after the most
desirable companies?
10. General purchasing policies: Should we serve companies that prefer leasing? Service contract? Systems purchases? Sealed bidding?
11. Purchasing criteria: Should we serve companies that are seeking quality? Service? Price?
Situational Factors
12. Urgency: Should we serve companies that need quick and sudden delivery or service?
13. Specific application: Should we focus on a certain application of our product rather than all applications?
14. Size or order: Should we focus on large or small orders?
Personal Characteristics
15. Buyer-seller similarity: Should we serve companies whose people and values are similar to ours?
16. Attitude toward risk: Should we serve risk-taking or risk-avoiding customers?
17. Loyalty: Should we serve companies that show high loyalty to their suppliers?
Source: Adapted from Thomas V. Bonoma and Benson P. Shapiro, Segmenting the Industrial Market (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1983).

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

231

company distinguished among customers buying on price, service, or quality. Because
it had a high-service profile, the firm decided to concentrate on the service-motivated
segment of the market.
Business-to-business marketing experts James C. Anderson and James A. Narus have
urged marketers to present flexible market offerings to all members of a segment.52 A
flexible market offering consists of two parts: a naked solution containing the product
and service elements that all segment members value, and discretionary options that
some segment members value. Each option might carry an additional charge. Siemens
Electrical Apparatus Division sells metal-clad boxes to small manufacturers at prices that
include free delivery and a warranty, but it also offers installation, tests, and communication peripherals as extra-cost options. Delta Airlines offers all economy passengers a seat,
small snack and soft drinks and charges extra for alcoholic beverages and meals.

Market Targeting
There are many statistical techniques for developing market segments.53 Once the firm has identified
its market-segment opportunities, it must decide how many and which ones to target. Marketers are
increasingly combining several variables in an effort to identify smaller, better-defined target groups.
Thus, a bank may not only identify a group of wealthy retired adults but within that group distinguish
several segments depending on current income, assets, savings, and risk preferences. This has led
some market researchers to advocate a needs-based market segmentation approach, as introduced
previously. Roger Best proposed the seven-step approach shown in
Table 8.6.

Delta Airlines uses flexible
market offerings; it offers some
products on board for free,
such as soft drinks and small
snacks, but charges for other
items, such as meals.

Effective Segmentation Criteria
Not all segmentation schemes are useful. We could divide buyers of table salt into blond and
brunette customers, but hair color is undoubtedly irrelevant to the purchase of salt. Furthermore, if
all salt buyers buy the same amount of salt each month, believe all salt is the same, and would pay
only one price for salt, this market is minimally segmentable from a marketing point of view.
To be useful, market segments must rate favorably on five key criteria:
•
•

•

Measurable. The size, purchasing power, and characteristics of the segments can be measured.
Substantial. The segments are large and profitable enough to serve. A segment should be the
largest possible homogeneous group worth going after with a tailored marketing program. It
would not pay, for example, for an automobile manufacturer to develop cars for people who
are less than four feet tall.
Accessible. The segments can be effectively reached and served.

TABLE 8.6

Steps in the Segmentation Process
Description

1. Needs-Based Segmentation
2. Segment Identification
3. Segment Attractiveness
4. Segment Profitability
5. Segment Positioning
6. Segment “Acid Test”
7. Marketing-Mix Strategy

Group customers into segments based on similar needs and benefits sought by customers in solving
a particular consumption problem.
For each needs-based segment, determine which demographics, lifestyles, and usage behaviors make
the segment distinct and identifiable (actionable).
Using predetermined segment attractiveness criteria (such as market growth, competitive intensity,
and market access), determine the overall attractiveness of each segment.
Determine segment profitability.
For each segment, create a “value proposition” and product-price positioning strategy based on that
segment’s unique customer needs and characteristics.
Create “segment storyboard” to test the attractiveness of each segment’s positioning strategy.
Expand segment positioning strategy to include all aspects of the marketing mix: product, price,
promotion, and place.

Source: Adapted from Roger J. Best, Market-Based Management, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009). ©2009. Printed and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

232

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

•

•

Differentiable. The segments are conceptually distinguishable and respond differently to
different marketing-mix elements and programs. If married and unmarried women respond
similarly to a sale on perfume, they do not constitute separate segments.
Actionable. Effective programs can be formulated for attracting and serving the segments.

Michael Porter has identified five forces that determine the intrinsic long-run attractiveness of
a market or market segment: industry competitors, potential entrants, substitutes, buyers, and
suppliers. The threats these forces pose are as follows:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Threat of intense segment rivalry—A segment is unattractive if it already contains numerous,
strong, or aggressive competitors. It’s even more unattractive if it’s stable or declining, if plant
capacity must be added in large increments, if fixed costs or exit barriers are high, or if competitors have high stakes in staying in the segment. These conditions will lead to frequent price
wars, advertising battles, and new-product introductions and will make it expensive to compete. The cellular phone market has seen fierce competition due to segment rivalry.
Threat of new entrants—The most attractive segment is one in which entry barriers are high
and exit barriers are low.54 Few new firms can enter the industry, and poorly performing firms
can easily exit. When both entry and exit barriers are high, profit potential is high, but firms
face more risk because poorer-performing firms stay in and fight it out. When both entry and
exit barriers are low, firms easily enter and leave the industry, and returns are stable but low.
The worst case is when entry barriers are low and exit barriers are high: Here firms enter during good times but find it hard to leave during bad times. The result is chronic overcapacity
and depressed earnings for all. The airline industry has low entry barriers but high exit barriers,
leaving all carriers struggling during economic downturns.
Threat of substitute products—A segment is unattractive when there are actual or potential
substitutes for the product. Substitutes place a limit on prices and on profits. If technology
advances or competition increases in these substitute industries, prices and profits are likely to
fall. Air travel has severely challenged profitability for Greyhound and Amtrak.
Threat of buyers’ growing bargaining power—A segment is unattractive if buyers possess strong
or growing bargaining power. The rise of retail giants such as Walmart has led some analysts to
conclude that the potential profitability of packaged-goods companies will become curtailed.
Buyers’ bargaining power grows when they become more concentrated or organized, when the
product represents a significant fraction of their costs, when the product is undifferentiated,
when buyers’ switching costs are low, when buyers are price-sensitive because of low profits, or
when they can integrate upstream. To protect themselves, sellers might select buyers who have
the least power to negotiate or switch suppliers. A better defense is developing superior offers
that strong buyers cannot refuse.
Threat of suppliers’ growing bargaining power—A segment is unattractive if the company’s
suppliers are able to raise prices or reduce quantity supplied. Suppliers tend to be powerful
when they are concentrated or organized, when they can integrate downstream, when there
are few substitutes, when the supplied product is an important input, and when the costs of
switching suppliers are high. The best defenses are to build win-win relationships with suppliers
or use multiple supply sources.

Evaluating and Selecting the Market Segments
In evaluating different market segments, the firm must look at two factors: the segment’s overall
attractiveness and the company’s objectives and resources. How well does a potential segment
score on the five criteria? Does it have characteristics that make it generally attractive, such as
size, growth, profitability, scale economies, and low risk? Does investing in the segment make
sense given the firm’s objectives, competencies, and resources? Some attractive segments may not
mesh with the company’s long-run objectives, or the company may lack one or more necessary
competencies to offer superior value.
Marketers have a range or continuum of possible levels of segmentation that can guide their
target market decisions. As
Figure 8.4 shows, at one end is a mass market of essentially one
segment; at the other are individuals or segments of one person. Between lie multiple segments
and single segments. We describe each of the four approaches next.

FULL MARKET COVERAGE With full market coverage, a firm attempts to serve all customer
groups with all the products they might need. Only very large firms such as Microsoft (software

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

Full
Market
Coverage

|Fig. 8.4|
Multiple
Segments

Single
Segments

Possible Levels of
Segmentation

Individuals
as Segments

Customization
Mass Market

market), General Motors (vehicle market), and Coca-Cola (nonalcoholic beverage market) can
undertake a full market coverage strategy. Large firms can cover a whole market in two broad ways:
through differentiated or undifferentiated marketing.
In undifferentiated or mass marketing, the firm ignores segment differences and goes after the
whole market with one offer. It designs a marketing program for a product with a superior image
that can be sold to the broadest number of buyers via mass distribution and mass communications.
Undifferentiated marketing is appropriate when all consumers have roughly the same preferences
and the market shows no natural segments. Henry Ford epitomized this strategy when he offered
the Model-T Ford in one color, black.
The argument for mass marketing is that it creates the largest potential market, which leads to
the lowest costs, which in turn can lead to lower prices or higher margins. The narrow product
line keeps down the costs of research and development, production, inventory, transportation,
marketing research, advertising, and product management. The undifferentiated communication
program also reduces costs. However, many critics point to the increasing splintering of the market, and the proliferation of marketing channels and communication, which make it difficult and
increasingly expensive to reach a mass audience.
When different groups of consumers have different needs and wants, marketers can define multiple segments. The company can often better design, price, disclose, and deliver the product or service
and also fine-tune the marketing program and activities to better reflect competitors’ marketing. In
differentiated marketing, the firm sells different products to all the different segments of the market.
Cosmetics firm Estée Lauder markets brands that appeal to women (and men) of different tastes: The
flagship brand, the original Estée Lauder, appeals to older consumers; Clinique caters to middle-aged
women; M.A.C. to youthful hipsters; Aveda to aromatherapy enthusiasts; and Origins to ecoconscious
consumers who want cosmetics made from natural ingredients.55 Perhaps no firm practices differentiated marketing like Hallmark Cards, which celebrated its 100th birthday in 2010.

Hallmark

Hallmark’s personal expression products are sold in more than 41,500
retail outlets nationwide and account for almost one of every two greeting cards purchased in the
United States. Each year Hallmark produces 19,000 new and redesigned greeting cards and
related products including party goods, gift wrap, and ornaments. Its success is due in part to its
vigorous segmentation of the greeting card business. In addition to popular sub-branded card
lines such as the humorous Shoebox Greetings, Hallmark has introduced lines targeting specific market segments. Fresh Ink targets 18- to 39-year-old women. Hallmark Warm Wishes offers hundreds of 99-cent
cards. Hallmark’s three ethnic lines—Mahogany, Sinceramente Hallmark, and Tree of Life—target African
American, Hispanic, and Jewish consumers, respectively. Hallmark’s newer Journeys line of encouragement
cards focused on such challenges as fighting cancer, coming out, and battling depression. Specific greeting
cards also benefit charities such as (PRODUCT) RED™, UNICEF, and the Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure.
Hallmark has also embraced technology. Musical greeting cards incorporate sound clips from popular movies,
TV shows, and songs. Online, Hallmark offers e-cards as well as personalized printed greeting cards that it
mails for consumers. For business needs, Hallmark Business Expressions offers personalized corporate holiday cards and greeting cards for all occasions and events.56
Hallmark

| CHAPTER 8

Differentiated marketing typically creates more total sales than undifferentiated marketing.
However, it also increases the costs of doing business. Because differentiated marketing leads to
both higher sales and higher costs, no generalizations about its profitability are valid.

233

234

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

MULTIPLE SEGMENT SPECIALIZATION With selective specialization, a
firm selects a subset of all the possible segments, each objectively attractive and
appropriate. There may be little or no synergy among the segments, but each
promises to be a moneymaker. When Procter & Gamble launched Crest
Whitestrips, initial target segments included newly engaged women and brides-tobe as well as gay males. The multisegment strategy also has the advantage of
diversifying the firm’s risk.
Keeping synergies in mind, companies can try to operate in supersegments rather
than in isolated segments. A supersegment is a set of segments sharing some exploitable similarity. For example, many symphony orchestras target people who have
broad cultural interests, rather than only those who regularly attend concerts. A firm
can also attempt to achieve some synergy with product or market specialization.
•

•

Although P&G initially targeted
very specific segments with its
Crest Whitestrips tooth-whitening
product, it later expanded both its
product offerings and its target
markets.

Tom’s of Maine has developed
a very successful niche with its
all-natural personal care products.

With product specialization, the firm sells a certain product to several different
market segments. A microscope manufacturer, for instance, sells to university,
government, and commercial laboratories, making different instruments for
each and building a strong reputation in the specific product area. The downside risk is that the product may be supplanted by an entirely new technology.
With market specialization, the firm concentrates on serving many needs of a
particular customer group, such as by selling an assortment of products only to
university laboratories. The firm gains a strong reputation among this customer
group and becomes a channel for additional products its members can use. The
downside risk is that the customer group may suffer budget cuts or shrink in size.

SINGLE-SEGMENT CONCENTRATION With single-segment concentration, the firm
markets to only one particular segment. Porsche concentrates on the sports car market and
Volkswagen on the small-car market—its foray into the large-car market with the Phaeton was a
failure in the United States. Through concentrated marketing, the firm gains deep knowledge of the
segment’s needs and achieves a strong market presence. It also enjoys operating economies by
specializing its production, distribution, and promotion. If it captures segment leadership, the firm
can earn a high return on its investment.
A niche is a more narrowly defined customer group seeking a distinctive mix of benefits within a
segment. Marketers usually identify niches by dividing a segment into subsegments. Whereas Hertz,
Avis, Alamo, and others specialize in airport rental cars for business and leisure travelers, Enterprise
has attacked the low-budget, insurance-replacement market by primarily renting to customers
whose cars have been wrecked or stolen. By creating unique associations to low cost and convenience
in an overlooked niche market, Enterprise has been highly profitable.
Niche marketers aim to understand their customers’ needs so well that customers willingly pay
a premium. Tom’s of Maine was acquired by Colgate-Palmolive for $100 million in part because its
all-natural personal care products and charitable donation programs appeal to consumers turned
off by big businesses. The brand commands a 30 percent price premium as a result.57
What does an attractive niche look like? Customers have a distinct set of needs; they will pay a
premium to the firm that best satisfies them; the niche is fairly small but has size, profit, and growth
potential and is unlikely to attract many competitors; and the niche gains certain economies
through specialization. As marketing efficiency increases, niches that were seemingly too small may
become more profitable.58 See “Marketing Insight: Chasing the Long Tail.”
INDIVIDUAL MARKETING The ultimate level of segmentation leads to “segments of one,”
“customized marketing,” or “one-to-one marketing.”59 Today, customers are taking more
individual initiative in determining what and how to buy. They log onto the Internet; look up
information and evaluations of product or service offerings; conduct
dialogue with suppliers, users, and product critics; and in many cases design
the product they want.
Jerry Wind and Arvind Rangaswamy see a movement toward “customerizing” the firm.60 Customerization combines operationally driven
mass customization with customized marketing in a way that empowers
consumers to design the product and service offering of their choice. The
firm no longer requires prior information about the customer, nor does it
need to own manufacturing. It provides a platform and tools and “rents”

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

Marketing Insight
Chasing the Long Tail
The advent of online commerce, made possible by technology and epitomized by Amazon.com, eBay, iTunes, and Netflix, has led to a shift in
consumer buying patterns, according to Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief
of Wired magazine and author of The Long Tail.
In most markets, the distribution of product sales conforms to a
curve weighted heavily to one side—the “head”—where the bulk of
sales are generated by a few products. The curve falls rapidly toward
zero and hovers just above it far along the X-axis—the “long tail”—
where the vast majority of products generate very little sales. The mass
market traditionally focused on generating “hit” products that occupy
the head, disdaining the low-revenue market niches comprising the tail.
The Pareto principle–based “80–20” rule—that 80 percent of a firm’s
revenue is generated by 20 percent of a firm’s products—epitomizes
this thinking.
Anderson asserts that as a result of consumers’ enthusiastic adoption of the Internet as a shopping medium, the long tail holds significantly more value than before. In fact, Anderson argues, the Internet has
directly contributed to the shifting of demand “down the tail, from hits to
niches” in a number of product categories including music, books,
clothing, and movies. According to this view, the rule that now prevails is
more like “50–50,” with smaller-selling products adding up to half a
firm’s revenue.

| CHAPTER 8

235

Anderson’s long tail theory is based on three premises: (1) Lower
costs of distribution make it economically easier to sell products without
precise predictions of demand; (2) The more products available for sale,
the greater the likelihood of tapping into latent demand for niche tastes
unreachable through traditional retail channels; and (3) If enough niche
tastes are aggregated, a big new market can result.
Anderson identifies two aspects of Internet shopping that support
these premises. First, the increased inventory and variety afforded online
permit greater choice. Second, the search costs for relevant new products are lowered due to the wealth of information online, the filtering of
product recommendations based on user preferences that vendors can
provide, and the word-of-mouth network of Internet users.
Some critics challenge the notion that old business paradigms
have changed as much as Anderson suggests. Especially in entertainment, they say, the “head” where hits are concentrated is valuable also
to consumers, not only to the content creators. One critique argued that
“most hits are popular because they are of high quality,” and another
noted that the majority of products and services making up the long tail
originate from a small concentration of online “long-tail aggregators.”
Although some academic research supports the long tail theory,
other research is more challenging, finding that poor recommendation
systems render many very low-share products in the tail so obscure and
hard to find they disappear before they can be purchased frequently
enough to justify their existence. For companies selling physical products, inventory, stocking, and handling costs can outweigh any financial
benefits of such products.
Sources: Chris Anderson, The Long Tail (New York: Hyperion, 2006); “Reading
the Tail,” interview with Chris Anderson, Wired, July 8, 2006, p. 30; “Wag the Dog:
What the Long Tail Will Do,” The Economist, July 8, 2006, p. 77; Erik Brynjolfsson,
Yu “Jeffrey” Hu, and Michael D. Smith, “From Niches to Riches: Anatomy of a
Long Tail,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Summer 2006), p. 67; John Cassidy,
“Going Long,” New Yorker, July 10, 2006; www.longtail.com; “Rethinking the
Long Tail Theory: How to Define ‘Hits’ and ‘Niches,’” Knowledge@Wharton,
September 16, 2009.

to customers the means to design their own products. A company is customerized when it is
able to respond to individual customers by customizing its products, services, and messages on
a one-to-one basis.61
Customization is certainly not for every company.62 It may be very difficult to implement for
complex products such as automobiles. It can also raise the cost of goods by more than the customer
is willing to pay. Some customers don’t know what they want until they see actual products, but they
also cannot cancel the order after the company has started to work on it. The product may be hard to
repair and have little sales value. In spite of this, customization has worked well for some products.

ETHICAL CHOICE OF MARKET TARGETS Marketers must target carefully to avoid
consumer backlash. Some consumers resist being labeled. Singles may reject single-serve food
packaging because they don’t want to be reminded they are eating alone. Elderly consumers who
don’t feel their age may not appreciate products that label them “old.”
Market targeting also can generate public controversy when marketers take unfair advantage of
vulnerable groups (such as children) or disadvantaged groups (such as inner-city poor people) or
promote potentially harmful products.63 The cereal industry has been heavily criticized for marketing efforts directed toward children. Critics worry that high-powered appeals presented through
the mouths of lovable animated characters will overwhelm children’s defenses and lead them to
want sugared cereals or poorly balanced breakfasts. Toy marketers have been similarly criticized.

236

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

Another area of concern is the millions of kids under the age of 17 who are online. Marketers
have jumped online with them, offering freebies in exchange for personal information. Many have
come under fire for this practice and for not clearly differentiating ads from games or entertainment.
Establishing ethical and legal boundaries in marketing to children online and offline continues to be
a hot topic as consumer advocates decry the commercialism they believe such marketing engenders.
Not all attempts to target children, minorities, or other special segments draw criticism. ColgatePalmolive’s Colgate Junior toothpaste has special features designed to get children to brush longer
and more often. Other companies are responding to the special needs of minority segments. Blackowned ICE theaters noticed that although moviegoing by blacks has surged, there were few innercity theaters. Starting in Chicago, ICE partnered with the black communities in which it operates
theaters, using local radio stations to promote films and featuring favorite food items at concession
stands.64 Thus, the issue is not who is targeted, but how and for what. Socially responsible marketing
calls for targeting that serves not only the company’s interests, but also the interests of those targeted.
This is the case many companies make in marketing to the nation’s preschoolers. With nearly
4 million youngsters attending some kind of organized child care, the potential market—including
kids and parents—is too great to pass up. So in addition to standards such as art easels, gerbil cages,
and blocks, the nation’s preschools are likely to have Care Bear worksheets, Pizza Hut reading programs, and Nickelodeon magazines.
Teachers and parents are divided about the ethics of this increasing preschool marketing push.
Some side with groups such as Stop Commercial Exploitation of Children, whose members feel
preschoolers are incredibly susceptible to advertising and that schools’ endorsements of products
make children believe the product is good for them—no matter what it is. Yet many preschools and
day care centers operating on tight budgets welcome the free resources.65

Summary
1. Target marketing includes three activities: market segmentation, market targeting, and market positioning.
Market segments are large, identifiable groups within
a market.
2. Two bases for segmenting consumer markets are
consumer characteristics and consumer responses.
The major segmentation variables for consumer
markets are geographic, demographic, psychographic, and behavioral. Marketers use them singly
or in combination.
3. Business marketers use all these variables along with
operating variables, purchasing approaches, and situational factors.
4. To be useful, market segments must be measurable,
substantial, accessible, differentiable, and actionable.

5. We can target markets at four main levels: mass, multiple segments, single (or niche) segment, and individuals.
6. A mass market targeting approach is adopted only by
the biggest companies. Many companies target multiple
segments defined in various ways such as various demographic groups who seek the same product benefit.
7. A niche is a more narrowly defined group. Globalization
and the Internet have made niche marketing more
feasible to many.
8. More companies now practice individual and mass
customization. The future is likely to see more individual consumers take the initiative in designing products
and brands.
9. Marketers must choose target markets in a socially
responsible manner at all times.

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

| CHAPTER 8

237

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is Mass Marketing Dead?

Marketing Discussion
Marketing Segmentation Schemes

With marketers increasingly adopting more and more refined market segmentation schemes—fueled by the
Internet and other customization efforts—some claim mass
marketing is dead. Others counter there will always be
room for large brands employing marketing programs to
target the mass market.
Take a position: Mass marketing is dead versus Mass
marketing is still a viable way to build a profitable brand.

Think of various product categories. In each segmentation
scheme, to which segment do you feel you belong? How
would marketing be more or less effective for you depending
on the segment? How would you contrast demographic and
behavioral segment schemes? Which one(s) do you think
would be most effective for marketers trying to sell to you?

Marketing Excellence

>>HSBC

HSBC
wants to be known as the “world’s
local bank.” This tagline reflects HSBC’s positioning as a
globe-spanning financial institution with a unique focus
on serving local markets. Originally the Hong Kong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited, HSBC was established in 1865 to finance the growing trade between
China and the United Kingdom. It’s now the secondlargest bank in the world.
Despite serving over 100 million customers through
9,500 branches in 85 countries, the bank works hard to
maintain a local presence and local knowledge in each
area. Its fundamental operating strategy is to remain close
to its customers. As HSBC’s former chairman, Sir John
Bond, stated, “Our position as the world’s local bank enables us to approach each country uniquely, blending local
knowledge with a worldwide operating platform.”
Ads for the “World’s Local Bank” campaign have depicted the way different cultures or people interpret the
same objects or events. One TV spot showed a U.S.
businessman hitting a hole-in-one during a round in

Japan with his Japanese counterparts. He is surprised
to find that rather than paying for a round of drinks in the
clubhouse, as in the United States, by Japanese custom
he must buy expensive gifts for his playing partners. In
another international TV spot, a group of Chinese businessmen take a British businessman out to an elaborate
dinner where live eels are presented to the diners and
then served sliced and cooked. Clearly disgusted by the
meal, the British businessman finishes the dish as the
voice-over explains, “The English believe it’s a slur on
your hosts’ food if you don’t clear your plate.” His
Chinese host then orders another live eel for him as the
voice-over explained, “Whereas the Chinese feel that it’s
questioning their generosity if you do.”
HSBC demonstrated its local knowledge with marketing efforts dedicated to specific locations. In 2005 it
set out to prove to jaded New Yorkers that the Londonbased financial behemoth was a bank with local knowledge. The company held a “New York City’s Most
Knowledgeable Cabbie” contest, in which the winning
cabbie got paid to drive an HSBC-branded BankCab fulltime for a year. HSBC customers could win, too. Any
customer showing an HSBC bank card, checkbook, or
bank statement was able to get a free ride in the
BankCab. HSBC also ran an integrated campaign highlighting the diversity of New Yorkers, which appeared
throughout the city.
More than 8,000 miles away, HSBC undertook a
two-part “Support Hong Kong” campaign to revitalize a
local economy hit hard by the 2003 SARS outbreak.
First, HSBC delayed interest payments for personal-loan
customers who worked in industries most affected by
SARS (cinemas, hotels, restaurants, and travel agencies).
Second, the bank offered discounts and rebates for
HSBC credit card users when they shopped and dined
out. More than 1,500 local merchants participated in the
promotion.

238

PART 3

CONNECTING WITH CUSTOMERS

HSBC also targets consumer niches with unique
products and services. It found a little-known product area
growing at 125 percent a year: pet insurance. The bank
now distributes nationwide pet insurance to its depositors
through its HSBC Insurance agency. In Malaysia, HSBC
offered a “smart card” and no-frills credit cards to the
underserved student segment and targeted high-value
customers with special “Premium Centers” bank branches.
In order to connect with different people and communities, HSBC sponsors more than 250 cultural and sporting
events with a special focus on helping the youth, growing
education, and embracing communities. These sponsorships also allow the company to learn from different people
and cultures around the world.
The bank pulls its worldwide businesses together under a single global brand with the “World’s Local Bank”
slogan. The aim is to link its international size with close
relationships in each of the countries in which it operates.
HSBC spends $600 million annually on global marketing,
consolidated under the WPP group of agencies.
In 2006, HSBC launched a global campaign entitled
“Different Values,” which embraced this exact notion of
multiple viewpoints and different interpretations. Print ads
showed the same picture three times with a different
interpretation in each. For example, an old classic car
appeared three times with the words, freedom, status
symbol, and polluter. Next to the picture reads, “The more
you look at the world, the more you realize that what one
person values may be different from the next.” In another
set of print ads, HSBC used three different pictures side
by side but with the same word. For example, the word
accomplishment is first shown on a picture of a woman
winning a beauty pageant, then an astronaut walking on
the moon, and finally a young child tying his sneaker. The

copy reads, “The more you look at the world, the more
you realize what really matters to people.” Tracy Britton,
head of marketing for HSBC Bank, USA, explained the
strategy behind the campaign, “It encapsulates our global
outlook that acknowledges and respects that people
value things in very different ways. HSBC’s global footprint
gives us the insight and the opportunity not only to be
comfortable, but confident in helping people with different
values achieve what’s really important to them.”
HSBC earned $142 billion in sales in 2009, making it
the 21st largest company in the world. It hopes its latest
campaign and continued position as the “World’s Local
Bank” will improve its $10.5 billion brand value, which
placed it 32nd on the 2009 Interbrand/BusinessWeek
global brand rankings.

Marketing Excellence

BMW is the ultimate driving machine. Manufactured by
the German company, Bayerische Motoren Werke AG,
BMW stands for both performance and luxury. The company was founded in 1916 as an aircraft-engine manufacturer and produced engines during World War I and World
War II. It evolved into a motorcycle and automobile maker
by the mid-20th century, and today it is an internationally
respected company and brand with €53 billion (about
$76 billion) in revenues in 2008.
BMW’s logo is one of the most distinct and globally
recognized ever created. The signature BMW roundel
looks like a spinning propeller blade set against a blue sky
background—originally thought to be a tribute to the
company’s founding days as an aircraft engine manufacturer. Recently, however, a New York Times reporter
revealed that the logo, which features the letters BMW at
the top of the outer ring and a blue-and-white checkered

>>BMW

Questions
1. What are the risks and benefits of HSBC’s positioning
itself as the “World’s Local Bank”?
2. Does HSBC’s most recent campaign resonate with its
target audience? Why or why not?
Sources: Carrick Mollenkamp, “HSBC Stumbles in Bid to Become Global Deal Maker,”Wall Street
Journal, October 5, 2006; Kate Nicholson, “HSBC Aims to Appear Global Yet Approachable,”
Campaign, December 2, 2005, p. 15; Deborah Orr, “New Ledger,” Forbes, March 1, 2004,
pp. 72–73; “HSBC’s Global Marketing Head Explains Review Decision,” Adweek, January 19, 2004;
“Now Your Customers Can Afford to Take Fido to the Vet,” Bank Marketing (December 2003): 47;
Kenneth Hein, “HSBC Bank Rides the Coattails of Chatty Cabbies,” Brandweek, December 1, 2003,
p. 30; Sir John Bond and Stephen Green, “HSBC Strategic Overview,” presentation to investors,
November 27, 2003; “Lafferty Retail Banking Awards 2003,” Retail Banker International,
November 27, 2003, pp. 4–5; “Ideas that Work,” Bank Marketing (November 2003): 10; “HSBC
Enters the Global Branding Big League,” Bank Marketing International (August 2003): 1–2;
Normandy Madden, “HSBC Rolls out Post-SARS Effort,” Advertising Age, June 16, 2003, p. 12;
"www.hsbc.com" Douglas Quenqua, “HSBC Dominates Ad Pages in New York Magazine Issue.”
New York Times, October 20, 2008, pg. B.6; Kimia M. Ansari, “A Different Point of View: HSBC.”
Unbound Edition, July 10, 2009; Press release, “The Evolution of “Your Point of View.” October 20,
2008; Fortune, Global 500; HSBC.com.

IDENTIFYING MARKET SEGMENTS AND TARGETS

design in the inner ring, was trademarked in 1917 and
meant to show the colors of the Free State of Bavaria,
where the company is headquartered.
BMW’s growth exploded in the 1980s and 1990s,
when it successfully targeted the growing market of baby
boomers and professional yuppies who put work first and
wanted a car that spoke of their success. The result: sporty
sedans with exceptional performance and a brand that
stood for prestige and achievement. The cars, which came
in a 3, 5, or 7 Series, were basically the same design in three
different sizes. The 1980s was also a time when yuppies
made Beemer and Bimmer, slang terms for BMW’s cars
and motorcycles, popular names that are still used today. At
the turn of the century, consumers’ attitudes toward cars
changed. Research showed that they cared less about the
bragging rights of the BMW brand and instead desired a variety of design, size, price, and style choices. As a result, the
company took several steps to grow its product line by
targeting specific market segments, which resulted in
unique premium-priced cars such as SUVs, convertibles,
roadsters, and less expensive compact cars, the 1 Series.
In addition, BMW redesigned its 3, 5, and 7 Series cars,
making them unique in appearance yet remaining exceptional in performance. BMW’s full range of cars now include
the 1 Series, 3 Series, 5 Series, 6 Series, 7 Series, X3 SUV,
X5 SUV, X6 SUV, Z4 (Roadster), and M. The redesign of the
7 Series, BMW’s most luxurious car, targeted a group called
“upper conservatives.” These wealthy, traditional consumers traditionally don’t like sportier cars, so BMW added
an influx of electronic components such as multiple options
to control the windows, seats, airflow, and lights, a pushbutton ignition, and night vision, all controlled by a pointand-click system called iDrive. These enhancements were
created to add comfort and luxury and attract consumers
away from competitors like Jaguar and Mercedes.
BMW successfully launched the X5 by targeting “upper liberals” who achieved success in the 1990s and
had gone on to have children and take up extracurricular
activities such as biking, golf, and skiing. These consumers needed a bigger car for their active lifestyles and

| CHAPTER 8

239

growing families, so BMW created a high-performance
luxury SUV. BMW refers to its SUVs as sport activity
vehicles in order to appeal even more to these active
consumers.
BMW created the lower-priced 1 Series and X3 SUV
to target the “modern mainstream,” a group who are also
family-focused and active but had previously avoided
BMWs because of the premium cost. The 1 Series
reached this group with its lower price point, sporty
design, and aspiration to own a luxury brand. The X3 also
hit home with its smaller, less expensive SUV design.
BMW introduced convertibles and roadsters to target
“post-moderns,” a high-income group that continues to
attract attention with more showy, flamboyant cars.
BMW’s 6 Series, a flashier version of the high-end
7 Series, also targeted this group.
BMW uses a wide range of advertising tactics to
reach each of its target markets but has kept the tagline
“The Ultimate Driving Machine” for over 35 years. During
that time, U.S. sales of BMW vehicles have grown from
15,000 units in 1974 to approximately 250,000 in 2009.
BMW owners are very loyal to the brand, and enthusiasts
host an annual Bimmerfest each year to celebrate their
cars. The company nurtures these loyal consumers and
continues to research, innovate, and reach out to specific
segment groups year after year.
Questions
1. What are the pros and cons to BMW’s selective target
marketing? What has the firm done well over the
years and where could it improve?
2. BMW’s sales slipped during the worldwide recession
in 2008 and 2009. Is its segmentation strategy too
selective? Why or why not?
Sources: Stephen Williams, “BMW Roundel: Not Born from Planes,” New York Times, January 7,
2010; Gail Edmondson, “BMW: Crashing the Compact Market,” BusinessWeek, June 28, 2004;
Neil Boudette, “BMW’s Push to Broaden Line Hits Some Bumps in the Road,” Wall Street Journal,
January 10, 2005; Boston Chapter BMW Club Car of America, boston-bmwcca.org; bmw.org,
Annual Report, Company History, January 22, 2010.

PART 4 Building Strong Brands
Chapter 9 | Creating Brand Equity
Chapter 10 | Crafting the Brand Positioning
Chapter 11 | Competitive Dynamics

ter
p
a
Ch

9

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What is a brand, and how does branding work?
2. What is brand equity?
3. How is brand equity built, measured, and managed?
4. What are the important brand architecture decisions in developing
a branding strategy?

With a unique concept and shrewd
grassroots marketing, Lululemon has
attracted a loyal customer base and built
a strong brand.

Creating Brand
Equity
One of the most valuable intangible assets of a firm is its brands, and it is
incumbent on marketing to properly manage their value. Building a strong brand is both an art and
a science. It requires careful planning, a deep long-term commitment, and creatively designed
and executed marketing. A strong brand commands intense consumer loyalty—at its heart is a
great product or service.

While attending yoga classes, Canadian entrepreneur Chip Wilson decided the cottonpolyester blends most fellow students wore were too uncomfortable. After designing a
well-fitting, sweat-resistant black garment to sell, he also decided to open a yoga studio, and lululemon was born. The company has taken a grassroots approach to growth
that creates a strong emotional connection with its customers. Before it opens a store in a new city, lululemon first identifies Marketers of successful 21st-century brands
influential yoga instructors or other fitness teachers. In exchange for a must excel at the strategic brand management process.
year’s worth of clothing, these yogi serve as “ambassadors,” hosting Strategic brand management combines the design and
students at lululemon-sponsored classes and product sales events. implementation of marketing activities and programs to build,
They also provide product design advice to the company. The cult-like measure, and manage brands to maximize their value. The
devotion of lululemon’s customers is evident in their willingness to pay strategic brand management process has four main steps:
$92 for a pair of workout pants that might cost only $60 to $70 from • Identifying and establishing brand positioning
Nike or Under Armour. lululemon can sell as much as $1,800 worth of • Planning and implementing brand marketing
product per square feet in its approximately 100 stores, three times • Measuring and interpreting brand performance
what established retailers Abercrombie & Fitch and J.Crew sell. After • Growing and sustaining brand value deals with brand
positioning.
coping with some inventory challenges, the company is looking to
expand beyond yoga-inspired athletic apparel and accessories into The latter three topics are discussed in this chapter.2 Chapter 11
similar products in other sports such as running, swimming, and biking.1 reviews important concepts dealing with competitive dynamics.

What Is Brand Equity?
Perhaps the most distinctive skill of professional marketers is their ability to create, maintain,
enhance, and protect brands. Established brands such as Mercedes, Sony, and Nike have commanded
a price premium and elicited deep customer loyalty through the years. Newer brands such as POM
Wonderful, SanDisk, and Zappos have captured the imagination of consumers and the interest of
the financial community alike.
The American Marketing Association defines a brand as “a name, term, sign, symbol, or design,
or a combination of them, intended to identify the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers
and to differentiate them from those of competitors.” A brand is thus a product or service whose
dimensions differentiate it in some way from other products or services designed to satisfy the same
need. These differences may be functional, rational, or tangible—related to product performance of
the brand. They may also be more symbolic, emotional, or intangible—related to what the brand
represents or means in a more abstract sense.
241

242

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Branding has been around for centuries as a means to distinguish the goods of one producer
from those of another.3 The earliest signs of branding in Europe were the medieval guilds’ requirement that craftspeople put trademarks on their products to protect themselves and their customers
against inferior quality. In the fine arts, branding began with artists signing their works. Brands
today play a number of important roles that improve consumers’ lives and enhance the financial
value of firms.

The Role of Brands
Brands identify the source or maker of a product and allow consumers—either individuals or
organizations—to assign responsibility for its performance to a particular manufacturer or distributor. Consumers may evaluate the identical product differently depending on how it is
branded. They learn about brands through past experiences with the product and its marketing
program, finding out which brands satisfy their needs and which do not. As consumers’ lives become more complicated, rushed, and time-starved, a brand’s ability to simplify decision making
and reduce risk becomes invaluable.4
Brands also perform valuable functions for firms.5 First, they simplify product handling or
tracing. Brands help to organize inventory and accounting records. A brand also offers the firm
legal protection for unique features or aspects of the product.6 The brand name can be protected through registered trademarks; manufacturing processes can be protected through
patents; and packaging can be protected through copyrights and proprietary designs. These intellectual property rights ensure that the firm can safely invest in the brand and reap the benefits
of a valuable asset.
A credible brand signals a certain level of quality so that satisfied buyers can easily choose the
product again.7 Brand loyalty provides predictability and security of demand for the firm, and it
creates barriers to entry that make it difficult for other firms to enter the market. Loyalty also can
translate into customer willingness to pay a higher price—often 20 percent to 25 percent more than
competing brands.8 Although competitors may duplicate manufacturing processes and product
designs, they cannot easily match lasting impressions left in the minds of individuals and organizations by years of product experience and marketing activity. In this sense, branding can be a
powerful means to secure a competitive advantage.9 Sometimes marketers don’t see the real importance of brand loyalty until they change a crucial element of the brand, as the now-classic tale of
New Coke illustrates.

Coca-Cola

Coca-Cola learned a valuable
lesson about its brand when it
changed its formula without
seeking sufficient consumer
permission.

Battered by a nationwide series of taste-test challenges from the
sweeter-tasting Pepsi-Cola, Coca-Cola decided in 1985 to replace its old formula with a
sweeter variation, dubbed New Coke. Coca-Cola spent $4 million on market research.
Blind taste tests showed that Coke drinkers preferred the new, sweeter formula, but the
launch of New Coke provoked a national uproar. Market researchers had measured the
taste but failed to measure the emotional attachment consumers had to Coca-Cola. There were angry
letters, formal protests, and even lawsuit threats to force the retention
of “The Real Thing.” Ten weeks later, the company withdrew New Coke
and reintroduced its century-old formula as “Classic Coke,” a move
that ironically might have given the old formula even stronger status in
the marketplace.
For better or worse, branding effects are pervasive. One research
study that provoked much debate about the effects of marketing on children showed that preschoolers felt identical McDonald’s food items—
even carrots, milk, and apple juice—tasted better when wrapped in
McDonald’s familiar packaging than in unmarked wrappers.10
To firms, brands represent enormously valuable pieces of legal
property that can influence consumer behavior, be bought and sold,
and provide their owner the security of sustained future revenues.
Companies have paid dearly for brands in mergers or acquisitions,
often justifying the price premium on the basis of the extra profits

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

| CHAPTER 9

243

expected and the difficulty and expense of creating similar brands from scratch. Wall Street
believes strong brands result in better earnings and profit performance for firms, which, in
turn, create greater value for shareholders.11

The Scope of Branding
How do you “brand” a product? Although firms provide the impetus to brand creation through
marketing programs and other activities, ultimately a brand resides in the minds of consumers. It is
a perceptual entity rooted in reality but reflecting the perceptions and idiosyncrasies of consumers.
Branding is endowing products and services with the power of a brand. It’s all about creating
differences between products. Marketers need to teach consumers “who” the product is—by
giving it a name and other brand elements to identify it—as well as what the product does and
why consumers should care. Branding creates mental structures that help consumers organize
their knowledge about products and services in a way that clarifies their decision making and, in
the process, provides value to the firm.
For branding strategies to be successful and brand value to be created, consumers must be convinced there are meaningful differences among brands in the product or service category. Brand
differences often relate to attributes or benefits of the product itself. Gillette, Merck, and 3M have
led their product categories for decades, due in part to continual innovation. Other brands create
competitive advantages through nonproduct-related means. Gucci, Chanel, and Louis Vuitton have
become category leaders by understanding consumer motivations and desires and creating relevant
and appealing images around their products.
Marketers can apply branding virtually anywhere a consumer has a choice. It’s possible to brand a
physical good (Ford Flex automobile, or Lipitor cholesterol medication), a service (Singapore Airlines
or Blue Cross and Blue Shield medical insurance), a store (Nordstrom or Foot Locker), a person (actress Angelina Jolie or tennis player Roger Federer), a place (the city of Sydney or country of Spain), an
organization (U2 or American Automobile Association), or an idea (abortion rights or free trade).12

Shaun White Action sports legend Shaun White survived three open-heart
surgeries before he was a year old, and later survived midair collisions and dramatic falls
in competition on his way to becoming a champion skateboarder and an Olympic gold
medalist in snowboarding. The two-sport legend was
signed by gear and apparel maker Burton when he was
only 7 years old. His likeability, authenticity, and shrewd business insights have made him one of the most influential endorsers in the
$150 billion youth market. Burton’s White Collection of high-priced
technical winter outerwear is one of the company’s hottest sellers; HP
has used White to market its laptops and flat-panel TV’s (which also
showcase his Shaun White Snowboarding video game created by
Ubisoft); a White-designed signature goggle has become Oakley’s
biggest seller; Target’s Shaun White 4 Target collection focuses on
street wear and skateboarding for a mass market; and long-time sponsor Red Bull even filmed White’s snowboarding trip to Japan and released the video on MTV and as a retail DVD.13

Defining Brand Equity
Brand equity is the added value endowed on products and services. It may be reflected in the way
consumers think, feel, and act with respect to the brand, as well as in the prices, market share, and
profitability the brand commands.14
Marketers and researchers use various perspectives to study brand equity.15 Customer-based approaches view it from the perspective of the consumer—either an individual or an organization—
and recognize that the power of a brand lies in what customers have seen, read, heard, learned,
thought, and felt about the brand over time.16

An action-sports hero, Shaun
White is one of the most
successful product endorsers for
the lucrative youth market, and
a brand in his own right.

244

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

To reinforce its luxury image,
Louis Vuitton uses iconic
celebrities such as legendary
Rolling Stones rocker Keith
Richards in print and outdoor
advertising.

Customer-based brand equity is thus the differential effect brand knowledge has on consumer
response to the marketing of that brand.17 A brand has positive customer-based brand equity
when consumers react more favorably to a product and the way it is marketed when the brand is
identified, than when it is not identified. A brand has negative customer-based brand equity if
consumers react less favorably to marketing activity for the brand under the same circumstances.
There are three key ingredients of customer-based brand equity.
1.
2.

3.

Brand equity arises from differences in consumer response. If no differences occur, the brandname product is essentially a commodity, and competition will probably be based on price.18
Differences in response are a result of consumers’ brand knowledge, all the thoughts, feelings,
images, experiences, and beliefs associated with the brand. Brands must create strong, favorable,
and unique brand associations with customers, as have Toyota (reliability), Hallmark (caring),
and Amazon.com (convenience).
Brand equity is reflected in perceptions, preferences, and behavior related to all aspects of the
marketing of a brand. Stronger brands lead to greater revenue.19
Table 9.1 summarizes
some key benefits of brand equity.

The challenge for marketers is therefore ensuring customers have the right type of experiences with
products, services, and marketing programs to create the desired brand knowledge. In an abstract
sense, we can think of brand equity as providing marketers with a vital strategic “bridge” from their
past to their future.20

TABLE 9.1

Marketing Advantages of Strong Brands

Improved perceptions of product performance
Greater loyalty
Less vulnerability to competitive marketing actions
Less vulnerability to marketing crises
Larger margins
More inelastic consumer response to price increases
More elastic consumer response to price decreases

Greater trade cooperation and support
Increased marketing communications effectiveness
Possible licensing opportunities
Additional brand extension opportunities
Improved employee recruiting and retention
Greater financial market returns

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

| CHAPTER 9

245

Marketers should also think of the marketing dollars spent on products and services each year as
investments in consumer brand knowledge. The quality of that investment is the critical factor, not
necessarily the quantity (beyond some threshold amount). It’s actually possible to overspend on
brand building, if money is not spent wisely.
Brand knowledge dictates appropriate future directions for the brand. A brand promise is the marketer’s vision of what the brand must be and do for consumers. Consumers will decide, based on what
they think and feel about the brand, where (and how) they believe the brand should go and grant permission (or not) to any marketing action or program. New-product ventures such as BENGAY aspirin,
Cracker Jack cereal, Frito-Lay lemonade, Fruit of the Loom laundry detergent, and Smucker’s premium
ketchup all failed because consumers found them inappropriate extensions for the brand.

Virgin America

After flying for only a few years, Virgin America became
an award-winning airline that passengers adore and that makes money. It is not unusual
for the company to receive e-mails from customers saying they actually wished their
flights lasted longer! Virgin America set out to reinvent the entire travel experience,
starting with an easy-to-use and friendly Web site and check-in. In flight, passengers revel
in Wi-Fi, spacious leather seats, mood lighting, and in-seat food and
beverage ordering through touch-screen panels. Some passengers
remark that Virgin America is like “flying in an iPod or nightclub.”
Without a national TV ad campaign, Virgin America has relied on PR,
word of mouth, social media, and exemplary customer service to
create an extraordinary customer experience and build the brand. As
VP-marketing Porter Gale notes, “Most of the social-media engagement has been responding, listening and connecting with fans, which
is important because it builds loyalty.”21

Brand Equity Models
Although marketers agree about basic branding principles, a number of models of brand equity offer some differing perspectives. Here
we highlight three more-established ones.

BRANDASSET® VALUATOR Advertising agency Young and
Rubicam (Y&R) developed a model of brand equity called the
BrandAsset® Valuator (BAV). Based on research with almost 800,000
consumers in 51 countries, BAV compares the brand equity of
thousands of brands across hundreds of different categories. There are
four key components—or pillars—of brand equity, according to BAV (see
•
•
•
•

Figure 9.1):

Energized differentiation measures the degree to which a brand is seen as different from
others, and its perceived momentum and leadership.
Relevance measures the appropriateness and breadth of a brand’s appeal.
Esteem measures perceptions of quality and loyalty, or how well the brand is regarded and
respected.
Knowledge measures how aware and familiar consumers are with the brand.

Energized differentiation and relevance combine to determine brand strength—a leading indicator
that predicts future growth and value. Esteem and knowledge together create brand stature, a
“report card” on past performance and a current indicator of current value.
The relationships among these dimensions—a brand’s “pillar pattern”—reveal much about a
brand’s current and future status. Energized brand strength and brand stature combine to form
the power grid, depicting stages in the cycle of brand development in successive quadrants (see
Figure 9.2). Strong new brands show higher levels of differentiation and energy than relevance, whereas both esteem and knowledge are lower still. Leadership brands show high levels
on all pillars. Finally, declining brands show high knowledge—evidence of past performance—
a lower level of esteem, and even lower relevance, energy, and differentiation.

By satisfying unmet consumer
needs with a little bit of flair,
Virgin America has quickly built
a strong brand.

246

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

ENERGIZED
DIFFERENTIATION
The brand’s point
of difference
Relates to margins
and cultural currency

|Fig. 9.1|

BrandAsset® Valuator
Model
Source: Courtesy of BrandAsset® Consulting,
a division of Young & Rubicam.

RELEVANCE
How appropriate the
brand is to you
Relates to consideration
and trial

BRAND STRENGTH
Leading Indicator
Future Growth Value

ESTEEM
How you regard the
brand
Relates to perceptions
of quality and loyalty

KNOWLEDGE
An intimate
understanding
of the brand
Relates to awareness and
consumer experience

BRAND STATURE
Current Indicator
Current Operating Value

According to BAV analysis, consumers are concentrating their devotion and purchasing power
on an increasingly smaller portfolio of special brands—brands with energized differentiation that
keep evolving. These brands connect better with consumers—commanding greater usage loyalty
and pricing power, and creating greater shareholder value. A hypothetical $10,000 invested in the
top 50 energy-gaining brands grew 12 percent while the S&P 500 index lost nearly 20 percent between December 31, 2001, and June 30, 2009. Some of the latest insights from the BAV data are
summarized in “Marketing Insight: Brand Bubble Trouble.”

BRANDZ Marketing research consultants Millward Brown and WPP have developed the
BrandZ model of brand strength, at the heart of which is the BrandDynamics pyramid. According
to this model, brand building follows a series of steps (see
Figure 9.3).
For any one brand, each person interviewed is assigned to one level of the pyramid depending
on their responses to a set of questions. The BrandDynamics Pyramid shows the number of consumers who have reached each level.
•
•
•
•
•

Presence. Active familiarity based on past trial, saliency, or knowledge of brand promise
Relevance. Relevance to consumer’s needs, in the right price range or in the consideration set
Performance. Belief that it delivers acceptable product performance and is on the consumer’s
short-list
Advantage. Belief that the brand has an emotional or rational advantage over other brands in
the category
Bonding. Rational and emotional attachments to the brand to the exclusion of most
other brands

“Bonded” consumers at the top of the pyramid build stronger relationships with and spend
more on the brand than those at lower levels. There are more consumers at the lower levels, so the
challenge for marketers is to help them move up.

BRAND RESONANCE MODEL The brand resonance model also views brand building as an
ascending series of steps, from bottom to top: (1) ensuring customers identify the brand and
associate it with a specific product class or need; (2) firmly establishing the brand meaning in
customers’ minds by strategically linking a host of tangible and intangible brand associations;
(3) eliciting the proper customer responses in terms of brand-related judgment and feelings; and
(4) converting customers’ brand response to an intense, active loyalty.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

By plotting a representative group of brands’ scores for both strength and stature, this matrix derived from the BrandAsset Valuator shows an
accurate picture of a brand’s status and overall performance.

HIGH

These brands have low brand strength but high
potential. They have built some energy and
relevance, but are known to only a relatively
small audience. Consumers are expressing
curiosity and interest.

Wikipedia

Crocs
AMD

Mini Cooper
TiVo
Lindt
SanDisk

Pom
Tazo

STRENGTH
Energized Differentiation and Relevance

Lenovo

Glacéau
Vitamin
Water

Method

Shiseido

Nikon
NICHE/MOMENTUM

Red Bull

Flickr
BitTorrent
Second Life

Schlitz
LOW

Tylenol

Blockbuster

Advil
Staples

AOL
Bausch & Lomb
Bank of America

Sprint
American Airlines

Kia

ERODING/DECLINING

Finesse
Taster´s Choice

Efferdent

H&R Block

Midas
Century 21

Dristan
Diners Club

Gerber

Michelob

Viacom

Vonage
Joost
Camper

Nordstrom

NBA

NEW/UNFOCUSED

Vespa

LEADERSHIP

Denny´s

Lacoste

Napster

Greyhound

Prudential
Alpo
HIGH

STATURE
Esteem and Knowledge
These brands, with both low brand stature
and low brand strength, are not well known
among the general population. Many are new
entrants; others are middling brands that have
lost their way.

Nothing else beats it

Source: Young & Rubicam
BrandAsset Valuator.

Burger King

Kodak
Xbox
NASCAR

Autotrader

Garnier
Kayak.com

Netflix

BlackBerry

|Fig. 9.2|

DirecTV

Silk Soymilk
Facebook
Moet & Chandon
Absolut

Zara

iPhone

Palm

Patagonia

Grameen Bank

Microsoft
Target
GE
Toyota

Nike

Harley-Davidson
Amazon
Xerox
Adidas
Verizon

247

The Universe
of Brand
Performance

These brands have become irresistible,
combining high brand strength with high brand
stature. They have high earnings, high margin
power, and the greatest potential to create
future value.
Pixar
Dr. Pepper
IKEA
Apple
LG Ninetendo Wii

| CHAPTER 9

Bonding

Does it offer something
better than the others?

Advantage

Can it deliver?

Performance

Does it offer
me something?

Relevance

Do I know
about it?

Presence

These brands show why high brand stature by
itself is insufficient for maintaining a leading
position. They struggle to overcome what
consumers already know about and expect
from them.

Strong relationship/
High share of category expenditure

|Fig. 9.3|

BrandDynamics™
Pyramid
Source: BrandDynamics™ Pyramid. Reprinted with
permission of Millward Brown.

Weak relationship/
Low share of category expenditure

248

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Marketing Insight
Brand Bubble Trouble
In The Brand Bubble, brand consultants Ed Lebar and John Gerzema use
Y&R’s historical BAV database to conduct a comprehensive examination
of the state of brands. Beginning with data from mid-2004, they discovered several odd trends. For thousands of consumer goods and services
brands, key brand value measures such as consumer “top-of-mind”
awareness, trust, regard, and admiration experienced significant drops.
At the same time, however, share prices for a number of years
were being driven higher by the intangible value the markets were attributing to consumer brands. Digging deeper, Lebar and Gerzema
found the increase was actually due to a very few extremely strong
brands such as Google, Apple, and Nike. The value created by the vast
majority of brands was stagnating or falling.
The authors viewed this mismatch between the value consumers see in
brands and the value the markets were ascribing to them as a recipe for disaster in two ways. At the macroeconomic level, it implied that stock prices of
most consumer companies are overstated. At the microeconomic, company
level, it pointed to a serious and continuing problem in brand management.
Why have consumer attitudes toward brands declined? The research identified three fundamental causes. First, there has been a proliferation of brands. New product introductions have accelerated, but
many fail to register with consumers. Two, consumers expect creative
“big ideas” from brands and feel they are just not getting them. Finally,
due to corporate scandals, product crises, and executive misbehavior,
trust in brands has plummeted.
Yet, vital brands are still being successfully built. Although all four
pillars of the BAV model play a role, the strongest brands resonated with
consumers in a special way. Amazon.com, Axe, Facebook, Innocent,
IKEA, Land Rover, LG, LEGO, Tata, Nano, Twitter, Whole Foods, and

Zappos exhibited notable energized differentiation by communicating
dynamism and creativity in ways most other brands did not.
Formally, the BAV analysis identified three factors that help define
energy and the marketplace momentum it creates:
1. Vision—A clear direction and point of view on the world and how it
can and should be changed.
2. Invention—An intention for the product or service to change the
way people think, feel, and behave.
3. Dynamism—Excitement and affinity in the way the brand is presented.
The authors offer a five-step framework to infuse brands with more
energy.
1. Perform an “energy audit” on your brand. Identify the current
sources and level of energy to understand your brand’s strengths
and weaknesses and how well brand management aligns with the
dynamics of the new marketplace.
2. Make your brand an organizing principle for the business. Find
an essential brand idea or thought that can serve as a lens through
which you define every aspect of the customer experience, including
products, services, and communications.
3. Create an energized value chain. Make the organization’s goals
for the brand real for everyone; all participants must think uniquely
from the perspective of the brand and understand how their own
actions boost the energy level of the brand and fuel the core.
4. Become an energy-driven enterprise. Stakeholders need to transfer their energy and passion to their business units and functions.
Once management’s aspirations for the brand and business begin
becoming part of the culture, the process of building an energized
brand enterprise is nearly complete.
5. Create a loop of constant reinvention. Finally, keep the organization and its brand in a state of constant renewal. Brand managers must be keenly aware of shifts in consumers’ perception and
values and be ready to reshape themselves again and again.
Sources: John Gerzema and Ed Lebar, The Brand Bubble: The Looming Crisis
in Brand Value and How to Avoid It (New York: Jossey-Bass, 2008); John
Gerzema and Ed Lebar, “The Trouble with Brands,” Strategy+Business 55
(Summer 2009).

According to this model, enacting the four steps means establishing a pyramid of six “brand building blocks” as illustrated in
Figure 9.4. The model emphasizes the duality of brands—the rational
route to brand building is on the left side of the pyramid and the emotional route is on the right side.22
MasterCard is a brand with duality, because it emphasizes both the rational advantages of the
credit card—its acceptance at establishments worldwide—as well as the emotional advantages,
expressed in the award-winning “Priceless” advertising campaign (“There are some things money
can’t buy; for everything else, there’s MasterCard.”).
Creating significant brand equity requires reaching the top of the brand pyramid, which occurs
only if the right building blocks are put into place.
•
•
•

Brand salience is how often and how easily customers think of the brand under various
purchase or consumption situations.
Brand performance is how well the product or service meets customers’ functional needs.
Brand imagery describes the extrinsic properties of the product or service, including the ways
in which the brand attempts to meet customers’ psychological or social needs.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

Stages of Brand Development

Brand

Building
Blocks

Branding Objective at
Each Stage
Intense,
active loyalty

4. Relationships =
What about you and me?

| CHAPTER 9

249

|Fig. 9.4|

Brand Resonance
Pyramid

Resonance

3. Response =
What about you?

2. Meaning =
What are you?

Judgments

Feelings

Performance

1. Identity =
Who are you?

Salience

Imagery

Positive,
accessible reactions

Points-of-parity
& difference

Deep, broad
brand awareness

MasterCard’s “Priceless”
campaign reinforces the emotional rewards of the brand.

•
•
•

Brand judgments focus on customers’ own
personal opinions and evaluations.
Brand feelings are customers’ emotional responses and reactions with respect to the brand.
Brand resonance describes the relationship
customers have with the brand and the extent
to which they feel they’re “in sync” with it.

Resonance is the intensity of customers’ psychological bond with the brand and the level of activity it
engenders.23 Brands with high resonance include
Harley-Davidson, Apple, and eBay. Fox News has
found that the higher levels of resonance and engagement its programs engender often lead to greater recall of the ads it runs.24

Building Brand
Equity
Marketers build brand equity by creating the right
brand knowledge structures with the right consumers. This process depends on all brand-related
contacts—whether marketer-initiated or not.25
From a marketing management perspective, however, there are three main sets of brand equity drivers:
1.

The initial choices for the brand elements or identities making up the brand (brand names, URLs,
logos, symbols, characters, spokespeople, slogans,
jingles, packages, and signage)—Microsoft chose
the name Bing for its new search engine because
it felt it unambiguously conveyed search and the
“aha” moment of finding what a person is looking for. It is also short, appealing, memorable,
active, and effective multiculturally.26

250

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

2.

3.

The product and service and all accompanying marketing activities and supporting marketing programs—Liz Claiborne’s fastest-growing label is Juicy
Couture, whose edgy, contemporary sportswear and accessories have a strong
lifestyle appeal to women, men, and kids. Positioned as an affordable luxury, the
brand creates its exclusive cachet via limited distribution and a somewhat risqué
name and rebellious attitude.27
Other associations indirectly transferred to the brand by linking it to some other
entity (a person, place, or thing)—The brand name of New Zealand vodka 42BELOW refers to both a latitude that runs through New Zealand and the percentage of
its alcohol content. The packaging and other visual cues are designed to leverage the
perceived purity of the country to communicate the positioning for the brand.28

Choosing Brand Elements
Brand elements are devices, which can be trademarked, that identify and differentiate the brand. Most strong brands employ multiple brand elements. Nike has the
distinctive “swoosh” logo, the empowering “Just Do It” slogan, and the “Nike” name
from the Greek winged goddess of victory.
Marketers should choose brand elements to build as much brand equity as possible. The test is what consumers would think or feel about the product if the brand
element were all they knew. Based on its name alone, for instance, a consumer
might expect SnackWell’s products to be healthful snack foods and Panasonic
Toughbook laptop computers to be durable and reliable.
The brand name 42BELOW has
both direct product meaning and
indirect meaning related to its
New Zealand origins.

BRAND ELEMENT CHOICE CRITERIA There are six criteria for choosing
brand elements. The first three—memorable, meaningful, and likable—are “brand building.” The
latter three—transferable, adaptable, and protectable—are “defensive” and help leverage and
preserve brand equity against challenges.
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

Memorable—How easily do consumers recall and recognize the brand element, and when—at
both purchase and consumption? Short names such as Tide, Crest, and Puffs are memorable
brand elements.
Meaningful—Is the brand element credible? Does it suggest the corresponding category and a
product ingredient or the type of person who might use the brand? Consider the inherent
meaning in names such as DieHard auto batteries, Mop & Glo floor wax, and Lean Cuisine
low-calorie frozen entrees.
Likable—How aesthetically appealing is the brand element? A recent trend is for playful names
that also offer a readily available URL, like Flickr photo sharing, Wakoopa social networking,
and Motorola’s ROKR and RAZR cell phones.29
Transferable—Can the brand element introduce new products in the same or different categories?
Does it add to brand equity across geographic boundaries and market segments? Although initially
an online book seller, Amazon.com was smart enough not to call itself “Books ‘R’ Us.” The Amazon
is famous as the world’s biggest river, and the name suggests the wide variety of goods that could be
shipped, an important descriptor of the diverse range of products the company now sells.
Adaptable—How adaptable and updatable is the brand element? The face of Betty Crocker
has received more than seven makeovers in 87 years, and she doesn’t look a day over 35!
Protectable—How legally protectable is the brand element? How competitively protectable?
Names that become synonymous with product categories—such as Kleenex, Kitty Litter, Jell-O,
Scotch Tape, Xerox, and Fiberglass—should retain their trademark rights and not become generic.

DEVELOPING BRAND ELEMENTS Brand elements can play a number of brand-building
roles.30 If consumers don’t examine much information in making product decisions, brand
elements should be easy to recall and inherently descriptive and persuasive. The likability of brand
elements may also increase awareness and associations.31 The Keebler elves reinforce home-style
baking quality and a sense of magic and fun for their line of cookies; Michelin’s friendly tire-shaped
Bibendum helps to convey safety for the family.
Often, the less concrete brand benefits are, the more important that brand elements capture
intangible characteristics. Many insurance firms use symbols of strength for their brands (the Rock
of Gibraltar for Prudential and the stag for Hartford), security (the “good hands” of Allstate and the
hard hat of Fireman’s Fund), or some combination (the castle for Fortis).

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

| CHAPTER 9

251

Mountain Dew’s Dew Tour is a
high-energy sponsorship that
reinforces the brand’s credentials
for the youth market.

Like brand names, slogans are an extremely efficient means to build brand equity.32 They can
function as useful “hooks” to help consumers grasp what the brand is and what makes it special,
as in “Like a Good Neighbor, State Farm Is There,” “Nothing Runs Like a Deere,” “Citi Never
Sleeps,” “Every Kiss Begins with Kay” for the jeweler, and “We Try Harder” for Avis rental cars.
But choosing a name with inherent meaning may make it harder to add a different meaning or
update the positioning.33

Designing Holistic Marketing Activities
Brands are not built by advertising alone. Customers come to know a brand through a range of
contacts and touch points: personal observation and use, word of mouth, interactions with company personnel, online or telephone experiences, and payment transactions. A brand contact is any
information-bearing experience, whether positive or negative, a customer or prospect has with the
brand, its product category, or its market.34 The company must put as much effort into managing
these experiences as into producing its ads.35
As we describe throughout this text, marketing strategy and tactics have changed dramatically.36
Marketers are creating brand contacts and building brand equity through new avenues such as
clubs and consumer communities, trade shows, event marketing, sponsorship, factory visits, public
relations and press releases, and social cause marketing. Mountain Dew created the multicity Dew
Tour in which athletes compete in different skateboarding, BMX, and freestyle motocross events to
reach the coveted but fickle 12- to 24-year-old target market.37
Integrated marketing is about mixing and matching these marketing activities to maximize
their individual and collective effects.38 To achieve it, marketers need a variety of different marketing activities that consistently reinforce the brand promise. The Olive Garden has become the second-largest casual dining restaurant chain in the United States, with more than $3 billion in sales in
2010 from its more than 700 North American restaurants, in part through establishing a fully integrated marketing program.

The Olive Garden The Olive Garden
brand promise is “the idealized Italian family meal” characterized by “fresh, simple, delicious Italian food,” “complemented
by a great glass of wine,” served by “people who treat you like
family,” “in a comfortable homelike setting.” To live up to that
brand promise, The Olive Garden has sent more than 1,100 restaurant
General Managers and team members on cultural immersion trips to Italy,
launched the Culinary Institute of Tuscany in Italy to inspire new dishes and
teach General Managers and team members authentic Italian cooking techniques, conducts wine training workshops for team members and inrestaurant wine sampling for guests, and is remodeling restaurants to give
them a Tuscan farmhouse look. Communications include in-store, employee, and mass media messages that all reinforce the brand promise and
ad slogan, “When You’re Here, You’re Family.”39

Olive Garden goes to extraordinary lengths to live up to its brand
promise of offering “the idealized
Italian family meal.”

252

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

We can evaluate integrated marketing activities in terms of the effectiveness and efficiency with
which they affect brand awareness and create, maintain, or strengthen brand associations and image. Although Volvo may invest in R&D and engage in advertising, promotions, and other communications to reinforce its “safety” brand association, it may also sponsor events to make sure it
is seen as contemporary and up-to-date. Marketing programs should be put together so the whole
is greater than the sum of the parts. In other words, marketing activities should work singularly
and in combination.

Leveraging Secondary Associations
The third and final way to build brand equity is, in effect, to “borrow” it. That is, create brand
equity by linking the brand to other information in memory that conveys meaning to consumers
(see
Figure 9.5).
These “secondary” brand associations can link the brand to sources, such as the company itself
(through branding strategies), to countries or other geographical regions (through identification of
product origin), and to channels of distribution (through channel strategy), as well as to other
brands (through ingredient or co-branding), characters (through licensing), spokespeople
(through endorsements), sporting or cultural events (through sponsorship), or some other thirdparty sources (through awards or reviews).
Suppose Burton—the maker of snowboards, ski boots, bindings, clothing, and outerwear—
decided to introduce a new surfboard called the “Dominator.” Burton has gained over a third of the
snowboard market by closely aligning itself with top professional riders and creating a strong
amateur snowboarder community around the country. To support the new surfboard, Burton
could leverage secondary brand knowledge in a number of ways:
•

•

It could “sub-brand” the product, calling it “Dominator by Burton.” Consumers’ evaluations
of the new product would be influenced by how they felt about Burton and whether they felt
that such knowledge predicted the quality of a Burton surfboard.
Burton could rely on its rural New England origins, but such a geographical location would
seem to have little relevance to surfing.

|Fig. 9.5|
Ingredients

Secondary Sources of
Brand Knowledge

Company

Alliances

Extensions

Other
Brands

Employees

People

BRAND

Country
of origin

Places

Endorsers

Channels
Things

Third-party
endorsements

Events
Causes

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

•
•

•

•

| CHAPTER 9

253

Burton could sell through popular surf shops in the hope that its credibility
would rub off on the Dominator brand.
Burton could co-brand by identifying a strong ingredient brand for its foam or
fiberglass materials (as Wilson did by incorporating Goodyear tire rubber on
the soles of its Pro Staff Classic tennis shoes).
Burton could find one or more top professional surfers to endorse the surfboard,
or it could sponsor a surfing competition or even the entire Association of
Surfing Professionals (ASP) World Tour.
Burton could secure and publicize favorable ratings from third-party sources
such as Surfer or Surfing magazine.

Thus, independent of the associations created by the surfboard itself, its brand name,
or any other aspects of the marketing program, Burton could build equity by linking
the brand to these other entities.

Internal Branding
Marketers must now “walk the walk” to deliver the brand promise. They must adopt
an internal perspective to be sure employees and marketing partners appreciate and
understand basic branding notions and how they can help—or hurt—brand equity.40
Internal branding consists of activities and processes that help inform and inspire
employees about brands.41 Holistic marketers must go even further and train and
encourage distributors and dealers to serve their customers well. Poorly trained
dealers can ruin the best efforts to build a strong brand image.
Brand bonding occurs when customers experience the company as delivering on its
brand promise. All the customers’ contacts with company employees and communications must be positive.42 The brand promise will not be delivered unless everyone in
the company lives the brand. Disney is so successful at internal branding that it holds seminars on the
“Disney Style” for employees from other companies.
When employees care about and believe in the brand, they’re motivated to work harder and feel
greater loyalty to the firm. Some important principles for internal branding are:43
1.

2.

3.

Choose the right moment. Turning points are ideal opportunities to capture employees’
attention and imagination. After it ran an internal branding campaign to accompany its external
repositioning, “Beyond Petroleum,” BP found most employees were positive about the new
brand and thought the company was going in the right direction.
Link internal and external marketing. Internal and external messages must match.
IBM’s e-business campaign not only helped to change public perceptions of the company in
the marketplace, it also signaled to employees that IBM was determined to be a leader in the
use of Internet technology.
Bring the brand alive for employees. Internal communications should be informative and
energizing. Miller Brewing has tapped into its brewing heritage to generate pride and passion
and improve employee morale.

Brand Communities
Thanks to the Internet, companies are interested in collaborating with consumers to create value
through communities built around brands. A brand community is a specialized community of
consumers and employees whose identification and activities focus around the brand.44 Three
characteristics identify brand communities:45
1.
2.
3.

A “consciousness of kind” or sense of felt connection to the brand, company, product, or other
community members;
Shared rituals, stories, and traditions that help to convey the meaning of the community; and
A shared moral responsibility or duty to both the community as a whole and individual
community members.

Brand communities come in many different forms.46 Some arise organically from brand users,
such as the Atlanta MGB riders club, the Apple Newton User Group, and the Porsche Rennlist online discussion group. Others are company-sponsored and facilitated, such as the Club Green Kids
(official kids’ fan club of the Boston Celtics) and the Harley-Davidson Owner’s Group (H.O.G.).

Successful brands such as Burton
Snowboards have to think
carefully about how to leverage
their strengths with new products
and markets, as well as how
to “borrow” equity from other
people, places, or things.

254

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Harley-Davidson

HarleyDavidson

Founded in 1903 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, HarleyDavidson has twice narrowly escaped bankruptcy but is today one of the most recognized motor
vehicle brands in the world. In dire financial straits in the 1980s, Harley desperately licensed its
name to such ill-advised ventures as cigarettes and wine coolers. Although consumers loved the
brand, sales were depressed by product-quality problems, so Harley began its return to greatness by improving manufacturing processes. It also developed a strong brand community in the form of an
owners’ club, called the Harley Owners Group (H.O.G.), which sponsors bike rallies, charity rides, and other
motorcycle events and now numbers 1 million members in over 1,200 chapters. H.O.G. benefits include a
magazine called Hog Tales, a touring handbook, emergency road service, a specially designed insurance
program, theft reward service, discount hotel rates, and a Fly & Ride program enabling members to rent
Harleys on vacation. The company also maintains an extensive Web site devoted to H.O.G., with information
about club chapters, events, and a special members-only section.47
A strong brand community results in a more loyal, committed customer base. Its activities and
advocacy can substitute to some degree for activities the firm would otherwise have to engage in,
creating greater marketing effectiveness and efficiency.48 A brand community can also be a constant source of inspiration and feedback for product improvements or innovations.
To better understand how brand communities work, one comprehensive study examined
communities around brands as diverse as StriVectin cosmeceutical, BMW Mini auto, Xena:
Warrior Princess television show, Jones soda, Tom Petty & the Heartbreakers rock and roll band,
and Garmin GPS devices. Using multiple research methods such as “netnographic” research with
online forums, participant and naturalistic observation of community activities, and in-depth

TABLE 9.2

Value Creation Practices

SOCIAL NETWORKING
Welcoming

Greeting new members, beckoning them into the fold, and assisting in their brand learning and
community socialization.

Empathizing

Lending emotional and/or physical support to other members, including support for brand-related trials
(e.g., product failure, customizing) and/or for nonbrand-related life issues (e.g., illness, death, job).

Governing

Articulating the behavioral expectations within the brand community.

IMPRESSION MANAGEMENT
Evangelizing

Sharing the brand “good news,” inspiring others to use, and preaching from the mountaintop.

Justifying

Deploying rationales generally for devoting time and effort to the brand and collectively to outsiders
and marginal members in the boundary.

COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Staking

Recognizing variance within the brand community membership and marking intragroup distinction and similarity.

Milestoning

Noting seminal events in brand ownership and consumption.

Badging

Translating milestones into symbols and artifacts.

Documenting

Detailing the brand relationship journey in a narrative way, often anchored by and peppered with milestones.

BRAND USE
Grooming

Cleaning, caring for, and maintaining the brand or systematizing optimal use patterns

Customizing

Modifying the brand to suit group-level or individual needs. This includes all efforts to change the factory
specs of the product to enhance performance.

Commoditizing

Distancing/approaching the marketplace in positive or negative ways. May be directed at other members
(e.g., you should sell/should not sell that) or may be directed at the firm through explicit link or through
presumed monitoring of the site (e.g., you should fix this/do this/change this).

Source: Adapted from Hope Jensen Schau, Albert M. Muniz, and Eric J. Arnould, “How Brand Community Practices Create Value,” Journal of Marketing 73 (September 2009) pp. 30–51.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

TABLE 9.3

| CHAPTER 9

255

The Myths and Realities of Brand Communities

Myth: Brand community is a marketing strategy.

Reality: Brand community is a business strategy. The entire business model
must support the community brand.

Myth: Brand communities exist to serve the business.

Reality: Brand communities exist to serve the people that comprise them. Brand
communities are a means to an end, not the ends themselves.

Myth: Build the brand, and the community will follow.

Reality: Cultivate the community and the brand will grow; engineer the community
and the brand will be strong.

Myth: Brand communities should be love fests for
faithful brand advocates.

Reality: Communities are inherently political and this reality must be confronted with
honesty and authenticity head-on; smart companies embrace the conflicts that make
communities thrive.

Myth: Focus on opinion leaders to build a strong
community.

Reality: Strong communities take care of all of their members; everyone in the
community plays an important role.

Myth: Online social networks are the best way to
build community.

Reality: Social networks are one community tool, but the tool is not the strategy.

Myth: Successful brand communities are tightly
managed and controlled.

Reality: Control is an illusion; brand community success requires opening up
and letting go; of and by the people, communities defy managerial control.

Sources: Susan Fournier and Lara Lee, The Seven Deadly Sins of Brand Community, Marketing Science Institute Special Report 08-208, 2008; Susan Fournier and Lara Lee, “Getting Brand Communities
Right,” Harvard Business Review, April 2009, pp. 105–11.

interviews with community members, the researchers found 12 value creation practices taking
place. They divided them into four categories—social networking, community engagement,
impression management, and brand use—summarized in
Table 9.2.
Building a positive, productive brand community requires careful thought and implementation.
Branding experts Susan Fournier and Lara Lee have identified seven common myths about brand
communities and suggest the reality in each case (see
Table 9.3).

Measuring Brand Equity
How do we measure brand equity? An indirect approach assesses potential sources of brand equity
by identifying and tracking consumer brand knowledge structures.49 A direct approach assesses the
actual impact of brand knowledge on consumer response to different aspects of the marketing.
“Marketing Insight: The Brand Value Chain” shows how to link the two approaches.50

Marketing Insight
The Brand Value Chain
The brand value chain is a structured approach to assessing the
sources and outcomes of brand equity and the way marketing activities
create brand value (see
Figure 9.6). It is based on several premises.
First, brand value creation begins when the firm targets actual or
potential customers by investing in a marketing program to develop the
brand, including product research, development, and design; trade or

intermediary support; and marketing communications. Next, we assume
customers’ mind-sets, buying behavior, and response to price will change
as a result of the marketing program; the question is how. Finally, the
investment community will consider market performance, replacement
cost, and purchase price in acquisitions (among other factors) to assess
shareholder value in general and the value of a brand in particular.
The model also assumes that three multipliers moderate the transfer
between the marketing program and the subsequent three value stages.
•
The program multiplier determines the marketing program’s ability
to affect the customer mind-set and is a function of the quality of
the program investment.
•
The customer multiplier determines the extent to which value created in the minds of customers affects market performance. This
result depends on competitive superiority (how effective the quantity
and quality of the marketing investment of other competing brands
are), channel and other intermediary support (how much brand

256

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

|Fig. 9.6|

Brand Value Chain

VALUE
STAGES

Source: Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand
Management, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2008). Printed and electronically
reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

Marketing
Program
Investment

Brand
Performance

Shareholder
Value

- Price premiums
- Price elasticities
- Market share
- Expansion success
- Cost structure
- Profitability

- Awareness
- Associations
- Attitudes
- Attachment
- Activity

- Product
- Communications
- Trade
- Employee
- Other

MULTIPLIERS

•

Customer
Mind-set

- Stock price
- P/E ratio
- Market capitalization

Program
Multiplier

Customer
Multiplier

Market
Multiplier

- Clarity
- Relevance
- Distinctiveness
- Consistency

- Competitive reactions
- Channel support
- Customer size & profile

- Market dynamics
- Growth potential
- Risk profile
- Brand contribution

reinforcement and selling effort various marketing partners are putting forth), and customer size and profile (how many and what types
of customers, profitable or not, are attracted to the brand).
The market multiplier determines the extent to which the value
shown by the market performance of a brand is manifested in
shareholder value. It depends, in part, on the actions of financial
analysts and investors.

Sources: Kevin Lane Keller and Don Lehmann, “How Do Brands Create Value,”
Marketing Management (May–June 2003), pp. 27–31. See also Marc J. Epstein
and Robert A. Westbrook, “Linking Actions to Profits in Strategic Decision
Making,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring 2001), pp. 39–49; Rajendra K.
Srivastava, Tasadduq A. Shervani, and Liam Fahey, “Market-Based Assets and
Shareholder Value,” Journal of Marketing 62, no. 1 (January 1998), pp. 2–18;
Shuba Srinivasan, Marc Vanheule, and Koen Pauwels, “Mindset Metrics in
Market Response Models: An Integrative Approach,” Journal of Marketing
Research, forthcoming.

The two general approaches are complementary, and marketers can employ both. In other
words, for brand equity to perform a useful strategic function and guide marketing decisions,
marketers need to fully understand (1) the sources of brand equity and how they affect outcomes
of interest, and (2) how these sources and outcomes change, if at all, over time. Brand audits are
important for the former; brand tracking for the latter.
•

•

A brand audit is a consumer-focused series of procedures to assess the health of the brand,
uncover its sources of brand equity, and suggest ways to improve and leverage its equity.
Marketers should conduct a brand audit when setting up marketing plans and when considering shifts in strategic direction. Conducting brand audits on a regular basis, such as annually,
allows marketers to keep their fingers on the pulse of their brands so they can manage them
more proactively and responsively.
Brand-tracking studies collect quantitative data from consumers over time to provide consistent, baseline information about how brands and marketing programs are performing.
Tracking studies help us understand where, how much, and in what ways brand value is being
created, to facilitate day-to-day decision making.

Marketers should distinguish brand equity from brand valuation, which is the job of estimating the total financial value of the brand.
Table 9.4 displays the world’s most valuable brands
in 2009 according to one ranking.51 In these well-known companies, brand value is typically over
half the total company market capitalization. John Stuart, cofounder of Quaker Oats, said: “If
this business were split up, I would give you the land and bricks and mortar, and I would take the
brands and trademarks, and I would fare better than you.” U.S. companies do not list brand
equity on their balance sheets in part because of differences in opinion about what constitutes a
good estimate. However, companies do give it a value in countries such as the United Kingdom,
Hong Kong, and Australia. “Marketing Insight: What Is a Brand Worth?” reviews one popular
valuation approach.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

TABLE 9.4

| CHAPTER 9

257

The World’s 10 Most Valuable Brands in 2009

Rank

Brand

2009 Brand Value (Billions)

1

Coca-Cola

$68.7

2

IBM

$60.2

3

Microsoft

$56.6

4

GE

$47.8

5

Nokia

$34.9

6

McDonald’s

$32.3

7

Google

$32.0

8

Toyota

$31.3

9

Intel

$30.6

10

Disney

$28.4

Source: Interbrand. Used with permission.

Marketing Insight
What Is a Brand Worth?
Top brand-management firm Interbrand has developed a model to formally estimate the dollar value of a brand. It defines brand value as
the net present value of the future earnings that can be attributed to
the brand alone. The firm believes marketing and financial analyses
are equally important in determining the value of a brand. Its process
follows five steps (see
Figure 9.7 for a schematic overview):
1. Market Segmentation—The first step is to divide the market(s) in
which the brand is sold into mutually exclusive segments that help
determine variances in the brand’s different customer groups.
2. Financial Analysis—Interbrand assesses purchase price, volume,
and frequency to help calculate accurate forecasts of future brand
sales and revenues. Once it has established Brand Revenues, it
deducts all associated operating costs to derive earnings before
interest and tax (EBIT). It also deducts the appropriate taxes and a
charge for the capital employed to operate the underlying business, leaving Economic Earnings, that is, the earnings attributed to
the branded business.
3. Role of Branding—Interbrand next attributes a proportion of
Economic Earnings to the brand in each market segment, by first
identifying the various drivers of demand, then determining the

degree to which the brand directly influences each. The Role of
Branding assessment is based on market research, client workshops, and interviews and represents the percentage of Economic
Earnings the brand generates. Multiplying the Role of Branding by
Economic Earnings yields Brand Earnings.
4. Brand Strength—Interbrand then assesses the brand’s strength
profile to determine the likelihood that the brand will realize
forecasted Brand Earnings. This step relies on competitive
benchmarking and a structured evaluation of the brand’s clarity,
commitment, protection, responsiveness, authenticity, relevance,
differentiation, consistency, presence, and understanding. For
each segment, Interbrand applies industry and brand equity metrics to determine a risk premium for the brand. The company’s
analysts derive the overall Brand Discount Rate by adding a
brand-risk premium to the risk-free rate, represented by the yield
on government bonds. The Brand Discount Rate, applied to the
forecasted Brand Earnings forecast, yields the net present value
of the Brand Earnings. The stronger the brand, the lower the
discount rate, and vice versa.
5. Brand Value Calculation—Brand Value is the net present value
(NPV) of the forecasted Brand Earnings, discounted by the Brand
Discount Rate. The NPV calculation comprises both the forecast
period and the period beyond, reflecting the ability of brands to
continue generating future earnings.
Increasingly, Interbrand uses brand value assessments as a dynamic,
strategic tool to identify and maximize return on brand investment across a
whole host of areas.
Sources: Interbrand, the Interbrand Brand Glossary, and Interbrand’s Nik Stucky
and Rita Clifton.

258

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

|Fig. 9.7|
Market Segments

Interbrand Brand
Valuation Method
Financial
Analysis

Demand
Drivers

Competitive
Benchmarking

Intangible
Earnings

Role of
Branding

Brand
Strength

Brand
Discount
Rate

Brand
Earnings

Brand Value
(net present value of future brand earnings)

Managing Brand Equity
Because consumer responses to marketing activity depend on what they know and remember
about a brand, short-term marketing actions, by changing brand knowledge, necessarily increase or
decrease the long-term success of future marketing actions.

Brand Reinforcement
As a company’s major enduring asset, a brand needs to be carefully managed so its value does not
depreciate.52 Many brand leaders of 70 years ago remain leaders today—Wrigley’s, Coca-Cola,
Heinz, and Campbell Soup—but only by constantly striving to improve their products, services,
and marketing.
Marketers can reinforce brand equity by consistently conveying the brand’s meaning in terms of
(1) what products it represents, what core benefits it supplies, and what needs it satisfies; and
(2) how the brand makes products superior, and which strong, favorable, and unique brand associations should exist in consumers’ minds.53 NIVEA, one of Europe’s strongest brands, has expanded
from a skin cream brand to a skin care and personal care brand through carefully designed and
implemented brand extensions that reinforce the brand promise of “mild,” “gentle,” and “caring.”
Reinforcing brand equity requires that the brand always be moving forward— in the right direction and with new and compelling offerings and ways to market them. In virtually every product
category, once-prominent and admired brands—such as Fila, Oldsmobile, Polaroid, Circuit City—
have fallen on hard times or gone out of business.54
An important part of reinforcing brands is providing consistent marketing support.
Consistency doesn’t mean uniformity with no changes: While there is little need to deviate from a
successful position, many tactical changes may be necessary to maintain the strategic thrust and
direction of the brand. When change is necessary, marketers should vigorously preserve and defend
sources of brand equity.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

| CHAPTER 9

259

Discover Communications

In the
hypercompetitive marketplace of cable TV channels, having a
consistently clear but evolving identity is critical. One of the most
successful cable TV programmers, Discovery Communications,
operates 13 channels in the United States with such signature
shows as Deadliest Catch and MythBusters (Discovery Channel), Whale Wars
(Animal Planet), and the once-popular, now-defunct Jon & Kate Plus 8 (TLC).
Positioning itself as the number one nonfiction media company in the world,
Discovery Communications is dedicated “to satisfying curiosity and making a
difference in people’s lives with the highest quality content, services and
products that entertain, engage and enlighten—inviting viewers to explore
their world.” For example, by recognizing that nature and animals harbor
mystery and danger, Animal Planet has developed into a more aggressive
and compelling brand. New channels in the works include a women’s channel with Oprah Winfrey, a kid’s channel in partnership with Hasbro, and a
possible series of science shows with director Steven Spielberg. Discovery is
also increasing its global expansion—including China and India—and now
reaches more than 1.5 billion subscribers in 170 countries, generating a
third of the company’s revenue from overseas.55
Marketers must recognize the trade-offs between activities that fortify the brand and reinforce its meaning, such as a well-received product improvement or a creatively designed ad campaign, and those that
leverage or borrow from existing brand equity to reap some financial
benefit, such as a short-term promotional discount.56 At some point,
failure to reinforce the brand will diminish brand awareness and
weaken brand image.

Brand Revitalization
Any new development in the marketing environment can affect a brand’s fortunes. Nevertheless, a
number of brands have managed to make impressive comebacks in recent years.57 After some hard
times, Burberry, Fiat, and Volkswagen have all turned their brand fortunes around to varying degrees.
Often, the first thing to do in revitalizing a brand is to understand what the sources of brand
equity were to begin with. Are positive associations losing their strength or uniqueness? Have
negative associations become linked to the brand? Then decide whether to retain the same positioning or create a new one, and if so, which new one.
Sometimes the actual marketing program is the source of the problem, because it
fails to deliver on the brand promise. Then a “back to basics” strategy may make
sense. As noted previously, Harley-Davidson regained its market leadership by doing
a better job of living up to customer expectations as to product performance. Pabst
Brewing Company did it by returning to its roots and leveraging key brand assets.

Pabst

The beginning of the 21st century was not kind to 165-yearold Pabst Brewing Company. Revenue from its portfolio of legacy brands—
including Pabst Blue Ribbon, Old Milwaukee, Lone Star, Rainier, Stroh’s,
and Schlitz—declined from an overall barrelage of 9.5 million in 2000 to
6.5 million in 2005. In response, new management set the company on a
new course, including contract brewing with carefully selected partners and a new emphasis on its distributor network. Perhaps the most important strategic asset and advantage, management felt, was the company’s trademarks: “Without a doubt our greatest asset is our brands. They have strong residual awareness. They have equity. They
are authentic. We have brands that have stood the test of time. New brands don’t have

Deadliest Catch has become
a defining program for the
Discovery Channel.

Pabst Blue Ribbon beer has
revitalized itself by tapping into
its authentic brand roots via
creative grassroots marketing.

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

credentials—street cred—like our brands do. It’s all about leveraging the power of our brands against
a focused consumer target with a unique brand message.” New grassroots marketing for Pabst Blue
Ribbon beer thus emphasized its genuine, no-nonsense qualities in nonmainstream locations such as
tattoo parlors, snowboarding venues and pro shops, and underground music scenes. Positive word of
mouth—there was essentially no advertising—gave the brand an authentic “retro-chic” image. PBR,
as it became known as, was suddenly hip. The brand’s resurgence was marked by a 25 percent increase in sales in 2009 that far exceeded even other sub-premium brews.58
In other cases, however, the old positioning is just no longer viable and a reinvention strategy is
necessary. Mountain Dew completely overhauled its brand image to become a soft drink powerhouse. As its history reveals, it is often easier to revive a brand that is alive but has been more or less
forgotten. Old Spice is another example.

Old Spice

260

Old Spice One of the first mass market fragrances, Old Spice dates back to

1937. Its classic aftershave and cologne combination—with soap on a rope sometimes
tossed in for good measure—was the classic Father’s Day gift for baby boomers to give, but
was largely irrelevant by the time Procter & Gamble acquired the brand in 1990. P&G’s
revitalization strategy was to abandon the old cologne business to focus on deodorants
and other male grooming products. Facing tough competition from Unilever’s edgy line of Axe products,
the firm reverted to its classic one-two punch of product innovation and new communications to target the
12- to 34-year-old male. New product development resulted in the creation of Old Spice High Endurance,
Pro Strength, and Red Zone lines of deodorants, body washes, body sprays, and shaving products. Old
Spice’s latest line, Ever Clear, arose from focus group participants’ “good-bye letters” to their current deodorant. A technological breakthrough allowed Ever Clear to promise the protection of a dry solid without
the uncomfortable waxy residue that left white streaks on clothing. All Old Spice products were backed by
tongue-in-cheek advertising that stressed the brand’s “experience.”59
There is obviously a continuum of revitalization strategies, with pure “back to basics” at one end,
pure “reinvention” at the other, and many combinations in between. The challenge is often to change
enough to attract some new customers but not enough to alienate old customers. Brand revitalization
of almost any kind starts with the product.60 General Motors’s turnaround of its fading Cadillac brand
was fueled by new designs that redefined its look and styling, such as the CTS sedan, XLR roadster, and
ESV sport utility vehicle.61 High-end clothing retailer Paul Stuart introduced its first ever sub-brand,
the bolder, sleeker Phineas Cole, to update its conservative image for a hipper, younger demographic.62

Devising a Branding Strategy
A firm’s branding strategy—often called the brand architecture—reflects the number and nature
of both common and distinctive brand elements. Deciding how to brand new products is especially
critical. A firm has three main choices:
1.
2.
3.

It can develop new brand elements for the new product.
It can apply some of its existing brand elements.
It can use a combination of new and existing brand elements.

When a firm uses an established brand to introduce a new product, the product is called a brand
extension. When marketers combine a new brand with an existing brand, the brand extension can
also be called a sub-brand, such as Hershey Kisses candy, Adobe Acrobat software, Toyota Camry
automobiles, and American Express Blue cards. The existing brand that gives birth to a brand
extension or sub-brand is the parent brand. If the parent brand is already associated with multiple
products through brand extensions, it can also be called a master brand or family brand.
Brand extensions fall into two general categories:63 In a line extension, the parent brand covers
a new product within a product category it currently serves, such as with new flavors, forms,
colors, ingredients, and package sizes. Dannon has introduced several types of Dannon yogurt line

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

extensions through the years—Fruit on the Bottom, All Natural Flavors, Dan-o-nino, and Fruit
Blends. In a category extension, marketers use the parent brand to enter a different product category, such as Swiss Army watches. Honda has used its company name to cover such different products as automobiles, motorcycles, snowblowers, lawn mowers, marine engines, and snowmobiles.
This allows the firm to advertise that it can fit “six Hondas in a two-car garage.”
A brand line consists of all products—original as well as line and category extensions—sold
under a particular brand. A brand mix (or brand assortment) is the set of all brand lines that a
particular seller makes. Many companies are introducing branded variants, which are specific
brand lines supplied to specific retailers or distribution channels. They result from the pressure
retailers put on manufacturers to provide distinctive offerings. A camera company may supply its lowend cameras to mass merchandisers while limiting its higher-priced items to specialty camera shops.
Valentino may design and supply different lines of suits and jackets to different department stores.64
A licensed product is one whose brand name has been licensed to other manufacturers that
actually make the product. Corporations have seized on licensing to push their company names and
images across a wide range of products—from bedding to shoes—making licensing a multibilliondollar business.65 Jeep’s licensing program, which now has 600 products and 150 licensees, includes
everything from strollers (built for a father’s longer arms) to apparel (with Teflon in the denim)—as
long they fit the brand’s positioning of “Life without Limits.” Through 400-plus dedicated Jeep
shop-in-shops and 80 Jeep freestanding stores around the world, licensing revenue now exceeds
$550 million in retail sales. New areas of emphasis include outdoor and travel gear, juvenile
products, and sporting goods.66

Branding Decisions
ALTERNATIVE BRANDING STRATEGIES Today, branding is such a strong force that
hardly anything goes unbranded. Assuming a firm decides to brand its products or services, it must
choose which brand names to use. Three general strategies are popular:
•

•

•

Individual or separate family brand names. Consumer packaged-goods companies have a long
tradition of branding different products by different names. General Mills largely uses individual
brand names, such as Bisquick, Gold Medal flour, Nature Valley granola bars, Old El Paso
Mexican foods, Progresso soup, Wheaties cereal, and Yoplait yogurt. If a company produces quite
different products, one blanket name is often not desirable. Swift and Company developed separate family names for its hams (Premium) and fertilizers (Vigoro). A major advantage of individual or separate family brand names is that if a product fails or appears to be of low quality, the
company has not tied its reputation to it. Companies often use different brand names for different quality lines within the same product class.
Corporate umbrella or company brand name. Many firms, such as Heinz and GE, use their corporate brand as an umbrella brand across their entire range of products.67 Development costs
are lower with umbrella names because there’s no need to run “name” research or spend heavily
on advertising to create recognition. Campbell Soup introduces new soups under its brand name
with extreme simplicity and achieves instant recognition. Sales of the new product are likely to be
strong if the manufacturer’s name is good. Corporate-image associations of innovativeness, expertise, and trustworthiness have been shown to directly influence consumer evaluations.68
Finally, a corporate branding strategy can lead to greater intangible value for the firm.69
Sub-brand name. Sub-brands combine two or more of the corporate brand, family brand, or
individual product brand names. Kellogg employs a sub-brand or hybrid branding strategy by
combining the corporate brand with individual product brands as with Kellogg’s Rice
Krispies, Kellogg’s Raisin Bran, and Kellogg’s Corn Flakes. Many durable-goods makers such as
Honda, Sony, and Hewlett-Packard use sub-brands for their products. The corporate or company name legitimizes, and the individual name individualizes, the new product.

HOUSE OF BRANDS VERSUS A BRANDED HOUSE The use of individual or separate
family brand names has been referred to as a “house of brands” strategy, whereas the use of an
umbrella corporate or company brand name has been referred to as a “branded house” strategy.
These two branding strategies represent two ends of a brand relationship continuum. A sub-brand
strategy falls somewhere between, depending on which component of the sub-brand receives more
emphasis. A good example of a house of brands strategy is United Technologies.

| CHAPTER 9

261

262

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

United Technologies UTC’s brand portfolio includes Otis elevators,
Carrier heaters and air conditioners, Hamilton Sundstrand aerospace and industrial, Sikorsky
helicopters, Pratt & Whitney jet engines, and UTC Fire & Security systems. Most of its brands are
the names of the individuals who invented the product or created the company decades ago—
they have more power and are more recognizable in the business buying marketplace. The
parent brand, UTC, is advertised only to small but influential audiences—the financial community
and opinion leaders in New York and
Washington, DC. After all, employees are
more loyal to the individual companies
owned by UTC. “My philosophy has
always been to use the power of the
trademarks of the subsidiaries to
improve the recognition and brand
acceptance, awareness, and respect for
the parent company itself,” said UTC’s
then-CEO George David.70
Two key components of virtually
any branding strategy are brand
portfolios and brand extensions.
(Chapter 12 discusses co-branding and
ingredient branding, as well as linestretching through vertical extensions.)

Brand Portfolios
A brand can only be stretched so far, and all the segments the firm would like to target may not view
the same brand equally favorably. Marketers often need multiple brands in order to pursue these
multiple segments. Some other reasons for introducing multiple brands in a category include:71
1.
2.
3.
4.

Increasing shelf presence and retailer dependence in the store
Attracting consumers seeking variety who may otherwise have switched to another brand
Increasing internal competition within the firm
Yielding economies of scale in advertising, sales, merchandising, and physical distribution

The brand portfolio is the set of all brands and brand lines a particular firm offers for sale in a
particular category or market segment.

Starwood Hotels & Resorts

One of the leading hotel and leisure
companies in the world, Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, has 850 properties in more than
95 countries and 145,000 employees at its owned and managed properties. In its rebranding attempt to go “beyond beds,” Starwood has differentiated its hotels along emotional, experiential
lines. Its hotel and call center operators convey different experiences for the firm’s different
chains, as does the firm’s advertising. This strategy emerged from a major 18-month positioning project,
started in 2006, to find positions for the portfolio of brands that would establish an emotional connection with
consumers. Consumer research suggested these positions for some of the brands:72
Starwood
Hotels &
Resorts

United Technologies’ brand
portfolio consists of a diverse
collection of companies, products,
and brands.

•

•

Sheraton. With the tagline “You don’t stay here, you belong,” Sheraton—the largest brand—is about
warm, comforting, and casual. Its core value centers on “connections,” an image aided by the hotel’s
alliance with Yahoo!, which cofounded the Yahoo! Link@Sheraton lobby kiosks and cyber cafés.
Four Points by Sheraton. For the self-sufficient traveler, Four Points strives to be honest, uncomplicated, and comfortable. The brand is all about providing a high level of comfort and little indulgences
like free high-speed Internet access and bottled water. Its ads feature apple pies and talk about
providing guests with “the comforts of home.”

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

•
•

W. With a brand personality defined as flirty, for the insider, and an escape, W offers guests unique
experiences around the warmth of cool.
Westin. Westin’s emphasis on “personal, instinctive, and renewal” has led to a new sensory
welcome featuring a white tea scent, signature music and lighting, and refreshing towels. Each
room features Westin’s own “Heavenly Beds,” sold exclusively in the retail market through
Nordstrom, further enhancing the brand’s upscale image.

The hallmark of an optimal brand portfolio is the ability of each brand in it to maximize equity
in combination with all the other brands in it. Marketers generally need to trade off market coverage with costs and profitability. If they can increase profits by dropping brands, a portfolio is too
big; if they can increase profits by adding brands, it’s not big enough. The basic principle in designing a brand portfolio is to maximize market coverage so no potential customers are being ignored,
but minimize brand overlap so brands are not competing for customer approval. Each brand
should be clearly differentiated and appealing to a sizable enough marketing segment to justify its
marketing and production costs.73
Marketers carefully monitor brand portfolios over time to identify weak brands and kill unprofitable ones.74 Brand lines with poorly differentiated brands are likely to be characterized by much
cannibalization and require pruning.75 There are scores of cereals, beverages, and snacks and thousands of mutual funds. Students can choose among hundreds of business schools. For the seller,
this spells hypercompetition. For the buyer, it may mean too much choice.
Brands can also play a number of specific roles as part of a portfolio.

FLANKERS Flanker or “fighter” brands are positioned with respect to competitors’ brands so
that more important (and more profitable) flagship brands can retain their desired positioning.
Busch Bavarian is priced and marketed to protect Anheuser-Busch’s premium Budweiser; and after
a difficult product launch, Celeron helped thwart AMD’s competitive challenge to Intel’s premium
Pentium microprocessor.76 Marketers walk a fine line in designing fighter brands, which must be
neither so attractive that they take sales away from their higher-priced comparison brands nor
designed so cheaply that they reflect poorly on them.

CASH COWS Some brands may be kept around despite dwindling sales because they manage
to maintain their profitability with virtually no marketing support. Companies can effectively
“milk” these “cash cow” brands by capitalizing on their reservoir of brand equity. Gillette still sells
the older Trac II, Atra, Sensor, and Mach III brands because withdrawing them may not necessarily
move customers to another Gillette brand.

LOW-END ENTRY LEVEL The role of a relatively low-priced brand in the portfolio often may
be to attract customers to the brand franchise. Retailers like to feature these “traffic builders”
because they are able to “trade up” customers to a higher-priced brand. BMW introduced certain
models in its 3 Series automobiles in part as a means of bringing new customers into the brand
franchise, with the hope of later moving them to higher-priced models when they decided to trade
in their cars.

HIGH-END PRESTIGE The role of a relatively high-priced brand often is to add prestige and
credibility to the entire portfolio. One analyst argued that the real value to Chevrolet of its highperformance Corvette sports car was “its ability to lure curious customers into showrooms and at
the same time help improve the image of other Chevrolet cars. It does not mean a hell of a lot for
GM profitability, but there is no question that it is a traffic builder.”77 Corvette’s technological
image and prestige cast a halo over the entire Chevrolet line.

Brand Extensions
Many firms have decided to leverage their most valuable asset by introducing a host of new products under their strongest brand names. Most new products are in fact line extensions—typically
80 percent to 90 percent in any one year. Moreover, many of the most successful new products, as
rated by various sources, are extensions. Among the most successful new product brand extensions
in supermarkets in 2008 were Dunkin’ Donuts coffee, Progresso Light soups, and Hormel

| CHAPTER 9

263

264

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Compleats microwave meals. Nevertheless, many new products are introduced each year as new
brands. The year 2008 also saw the launch of Zyrtec allergy relief medicine, G2 thirst quencher, and
Ped Egg foot files.

ADVANTAGES OF BRAND EXTENSIONS Two main advantages of brand extensions are
that they can facilitate new-product acceptance and provide positive feedback to the parent brand
and company.
Improved Odds of New-Product Success Consumers form expectations about a new product
based on what they know about the parent brand and the extent to which they feel this information
is relevant.78 When Sony introduced a new personal computer tailored for multimedia
applications, the Vaio, consumers may have felt comfortable with its anticipated performance
because of their experience with and knowledge of other Sony products.
By setting up positive expectations, extensions reduce risk.79 It also may be easier to convince retailers to stock and promote a brand extension because of anticipated increased customer demand.
An introductory campaign for an extension doesn’t need to create awareness of both the brand and
the new product; it can concentrate on the new product itself.80
Extensions can thus reduce launch costs, important given that establishing a new brand name
for a consumer packaged good in the U.S. marketplace can cost over $100 million! Extensions also
can avoid the difficulty—and expense—of coming up with a new name and allow for packaging
and labeling efficiencies. Similar or identical packages and labels can lower production costs for extensions and, if coordinated properly, provide more prominence in the retail store via a “billboard”
effect.81 Stouffer’s offers a variety of frozen entrees with identical orange packaging that increases
their visibility when they’re stocked together in the freezer. With a portfolio of brand variants
within a product category, consumers who want a change can switch to a different product type
without having to leave the brand family.

Positive Feedback Effects Besides facilitating acceptance of new products, brand extensions can

provide feedback benefits.82 They can help to clarify the meaning of a brand and its core values or
improve consumer loyalty to the company behind the extension.83 Through their brand
extensions, Crayola means “colorful arts and crafts for kids,” Aunt Jemima means “breakfast foods,”
and Weight Watchers means “weight loss and maintenance.”
Line extensions can renew interest and liking for the brand and benefit the parent brand by
expanding market coverage. The goal of Kimberly-Clark’s Kleenex unit is to have facial tissue in
every room of the home. This philosophy has led to a wide variety of Kleenex facial tissues and
packaging, including scented, ultra-soft, and lotion-impregnated tissues; boxes with drawings of
dinosaurs and dogs for children’s rooms; colorful, stylish designs to match living room décor; and
a “man-sized” box with tissues 50 percent larger than regular Kleenex.

By defining its brand promise in
terms of “colorful arts and crafts
for kids,” Crayola has extended
beyond crayons to successfully
introduce a range of different
products.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

A successful extension may also generate subsequent extensions.84 During the 1970s and 1980s,
Billabong established its brand credibility with the young surfing community as a designer and
producer of quality surf apparel. This success permitted it to extend into other youth-oriented
areas, such as snowboarding and skateboarding.

DISADVANTAGES OF BRAND EXTENSIONS On the downside, line extensions may
cause the brand name to be less strongly identified with any one product.85 Al Ries and Jack Trout
call this the “line-extension trap.”86 By linking its brand to mainstream food products such as
mashed potatoes, powdered milk, soups, and beverages, Cadbury ran the risk of losing its more
specific meaning as a chocolate and candy brand.87 Brand dilution occurs when consumers no
longer associate a brand with a specific or highly similar set of products and start thinking less of
the brand.
If a firm launches extensions consumers deem inappropriate, they may question the integrity
of the brand or become confused or even frustrated: Which version of the product is the “right
one” for them? Retailers reject many new products and brands because they don’t have the shelf or
display space for them. And the firm itself may become overwhelmed.
The worst possible scenario is for an extension not only to fail, but to harm the parent brand in
the process. Fortunately, such events are rare. “Marketing failures,” in which too few consumers
were attracted to a brand, are typically much less damaging than “product failures,” in which the
brand fundamentally fails to live up to its promise. Even then, product failures dilute brand equity
only when the extension is seen as very similar to the parent brand. The Audi 5000 car suffered
from a tidal wave of negative publicity and word of mouth in the mid-1980s when it was alleged to
have a “sudden acceleration” problem. The adverse publicity spilled over to the 4000 model. But the
Quattro was relatively insulated, because it was distanced from the 5000 by its more distinct branding and advertising strategy.88
Even if sales of a brand extension are high and meet targets, the revenue may be coming
from consumers switching to the extension from existing parent-brand offerings—in effect
cannibalizing the parent brand. Intrabrand shifts in sales may not necessarily be undesirable if
they’re a form of preemptive cannibalization. In other words, consumers might have switched to
a competing brand instead of the line extension if the extension hadn’t been introduced. Tide
laundry detergent maintains the same market share it had 50 years ago because of the sales contributions of its various line extensions—scented and unscented powder, tablet, liquid, and
other forms.
One easily overlooked disadvantage of brand extensions is that the firm forgoes the chance to
create a new brand with its own unique image and equity. Consider the advantages to Disney of
having introduced adult-oriented Touchstone films, to Levi’s of creating casual Dockers pants, and
to Black & Decker of introducing high-end DeWALT power tools.

SUCCESS CHARACTERISTICS Marketers must judge each potential brand extension by
how effectively it leverages existing brand equity from the parent brand, as well as how effectively,
in turn, it contributes to the parent brand’s equity.89 Crest Whitestrips leveraged the strong
reputation of Crest and dental care to provide reassurance in the teeth-whitening arena, while also
reinforcing its dental authority image.
Marketers should ask a number of questions in judging the potential success of an extension.90
•
•
•
•
•
•

Does the parent brand have strong equity?
Is there a strong basis of fit?
Will the extension have the optimal points-of-parity and points-of-difference?
How can marketing programs enhance extension equity?
What implications will the extension have for parent brand equity and profitability?
How should feedback effects best be managed?

To help answer these questions,
Table 9.5 offers a sample scorecard with specific weights and
dimensions that users can adjust for each application.
Table 9.6 lists a number of academic research findings on brand extensions.91 One major
mistake in evaluating extension opportunities is failing to take all consumers’ brand knowledge
structures into account and focusing instead on one or a few brand associations as a potential
basis of fit.92

| CHAPTER 9

265

266

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

TABLE 9.5

Brand Extendibility Scorecard

Allocate points according to how well the new product concept rates on the specific dimensions
in the following areas:
Consumer Perspectives: Desirability
10 pts. _____ Product category appeal (size, growth potential)
10 pts. _____ Equity transfer (perceived brand fit)
5 pts. _____ Perceived consumer target fit
Company Perspectives: Deliverability
10 pts. _____ Asset leverage (product technology, organizational skills, marketing effectiveness
via channels and communications)
10 pts. _____ Profit potential
5 pts. _____ Launch feasibility
Competitive Perspectives: Differentiability
10 pts. _____ Comparative appeal (many advantages; few disadvantages)
10 pts. _____ Competitive response (likelihood; immunity or invulnerability from)
5 pts. _____ Legal/regulatory/institutional barriers
Brand Perspectives: Equity Feedback
10 pts. _____ Strengthens parent brand equity
10 pts. _____ Facilitates additional brand extension opportunities
5 pts. _____ Improves asset base
TOTAL _____ pts.

TABLE 9.6

Research Insights on Brand Extensions

• Successful brand extensions occur when the parent brand is seen as having favorable associations
and there is a perception of fit between the parent brand and the extension product.
• There are many bases of fit: product-related attributes and benefits, as well as nonproduct-related
attributes and benefits related to common usage situations or user types.
• Depending on consumer knowledge of the categories, perceptions of fit may be based on
technical or manufacturing commonalties or more surface considerations such as necessary
or situational complementarity.
• High-quality brands stretch farther than average-quality brands, although both types of brands
have boundaries.
• A brand that is seen as prototypical of a product category can be difficult to extend outside
the category.
• Concrete attribute associations tend to be more difficult to extend than abstract benefit associations.
• Consumers may transfer associations that are positive in the original product class but become
negative in the extension context.
• Consumers may infer negative associations about an extension, perhaps even based on other
inferred positive associations.
• It can be difficult to extend into a product class that is seen as easy to make.
• A successful extension cannot only contribute to the parent brand image but also enable a
brand to be extended even farther.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

| CHAPTER 9

267

• An unsuccessful extension hurts the parent brand only when there is a strong basis of fit
between the two.
• An unsuccessful extension does not prevent a firm from “backtracking” and introducing a more
similar extension.
• Vertical extensions can be difficult and often require sub-branding strategies.
• The most effective advertising strategy for an extension emphasizes information about the
extension (rather than reminders about the parent brand).
Source: Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008). Printed and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Bic

Bic

The French company Société Bic, by emphasizing inexpensive, disposable products, was able to create markets for nonrefillable ballpoint pens in the late 1950s, disposable
cigarette lighters in the early 1970s, and disposable razors in the early 1980s. It unsuccessfully tried the same strategy in marketing BIC perfumes in the United States and Europe in
1989. The perfumes—two for women (“Nuit” and “Jour”) and two for men (“BIC for Men”
and “BIC Sport for Men”)—were packaged in quarter-ounce glass spray bottles that looked like fat cigarette lighters and sold for $5 each. The products were displayed on racks at checkout counters throughout Bic’s extensive distribution channels. At the time, a Bic spokeswoman described the new products as
extensions of the Bic heritage—“high quality at affordable prices, convenient to purchase, and convenient to use.” The brand extension was launched with a $20 million advertising and promotion campaign
containing images of stylish people enjoying themselves with the perfume and using the tagline “Paris in
Your Pocket.” Nevertheless, Bic was unable to overcome its lack of cachet and negative image associations, and the extension was a failure.93

Customer Equity
Achieving brand equity should be a top priority for any organization. “Marketing Memo:
Twenty-First-Century Branding” offers some contemporary perspectives on enduring brand
leadership.

marketing

Memo

Twenty-First-Century Branding

One of the most successful marketers of the past two decades, Scott
Bedbury, played a key role in the rise of both Nike and Starbucks. In his insightful book, A New Brand World, he offers the following branding principles:

4. Great brands establish enduring customer relationships. They
have more to do with emotions and trust than with footwear cushioning
or the way a coffee bean is roasted.

1. Relying on brand awareness has become marketing fool’s
gold. Smart brands are more concerned with brand relevance and
brand resonance.

5. Everything matters. Even your restroom.
6. All brands need good parents. Unfortunately, most brands come from
troubled homes.

2. You have to know it before you can grow it. Most brands don’t know
who they are, where they’ve been, and where they’re going.

7. Big is no excuse for being bad. Truly great brands use their superhuman powers for good and place people and principles before profits.

3. Always remember the Spandex rule of brand expansion. Just
because you can, doesn’t mean you should.

8. Relevance, simplicity, and humanity. Rather than technology, these
will distinguish brands in the future.

Source: Scott Bedbury, A New Brand World (New York: Viking Press, 2002). Copyright © 2001 by Scott Bedbury. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin
Group (USA) Inc.

268

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Finally, we can relate brand equity to one other important marketing concept, customer equity.
The aim of customer relationship management (CRM) is to produce high customer equity.94
Although we can calculate it in different ways, one definition is “the sum of lifetime values of all
customers.”95 As Chapter 5 reviewed, customer lifetime value is affected by revenue and by the costs
of customer acquisition, retention, and cross-selling.96
•
•
•

Acquisition depends on the number of prospects, the acquisition probability of a prospect,
and acquisition spending per prospect.
Retention is influenced by the retention rate and retention spending level.
Add-on spending is a function of the efficiency of add-on selling, the number of add-on selling
offers given to existing customers, and the response rate to new offers.

The brand equity and customer equity perspectives certainly share many common themes.97
Both emphasize the importance of customer loyalty and the notion that we create value by having
as many customers as possible pay as high a price as possible.
In practice, however, the two perspectives emphasize different things. The customer equity
perspective focuses on bottom-line financial value. Its clear benefit is its quantifiable measures of
financial performance. But it offers limited guidance for go-to-market strategies. It largely ignores
some of the important advantages of creating a strong brand, such as the ability to attract higherquality employees, elicit stronger support from channel and supply chain partners, and create
growth opportunities through line and category extensions and licensing. The customer equity
approach can overlook the “option value” of brands and their potential to affect future revenues
and costs. It does not always fully account for competitive moves and countermoves, or for social
network effects, word of mouth, and customer-to-customer recommendations.
Brand equity, on the other hand, tends to emphasize strategic issues in managing brands and
creating and leveraging brand awareness and image with customers. It provides much practical
guidance for specific marketing activities. With a focus on brands, however, managers don’t always
develop detailed customer analyses in terms of the brand equity they achieve or the resulting longterm profitability they create.98 Brand equity approaches could benefit from sharper segmentation
schemes afforded by customer-level analyses and more consideration of how to develop personalized, customized marketing programs for individual customers—whether individuals or organizations such as retailers. There are generally fewer financial considerations put into play with brand
equity than with customer equity.
Nevertheless, both brand equity and customer equity matter. There are no brands without
customers and no customers without brands. Brands serve as the “bait” that retailers and other
channel intermediaries use to attract customers from whom they extract value. Customers are
the tangible profit engine for brands to monetize their brand value.

Summary
1. A brand is a name, term, sign, symbol, design, or
some combination of these elements, intended to
identify the goods and services of one seller or group
of sellers and to differentiate them from those of competitors. The different components of a brand—brand
names, logos, symbols, package designs, and so
on—are brand elements.
2. Brands are valuable intangible assets that offer a
number of benefits to customers and firms and need
to be managed carefully. The key to branding is that
consumers perceive differences among brands in a
product category.
3. Brand equity should be defined in terms of marketing effects uniquely attributable to a brand. That is, different

outcomes result in the marketing of a product or service
because of its brand, compared to the results if that
same product or service was not identified by that brand.
4. Building brand equity depends on three main factors:
(1) The initial choices for the brand elements or identities making up the brand; (2) the way the brand is integrated into the supporting marketing program; and
(3) the associations indirectly transferred to the brand
by links to some other entity (the company, country of
origin, channel of distribution, or another brand).
5. Brand audits measure “where the brand has been,”
and tracking studies measure “where the brand is
now” and whether marketing programs are having the
intended effects.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

6. A branding strategy identifies which brand elements a
firm chooses to apply across the various products it
sells. In a brand extension, a firm uses an established
brand name to introduce a new product. Potential extensions must be judged by how effectively they leverage existing brand equity to a new product, as well as
how effectively they contribute to the equity of the
parent brand in turn.

| CHAPTER 9

269

7. Brands may expand coverage, provide protection,
extend an image, or fulfill a variety of other roles for
the firm. Each brand-name product must have a welldefined positioning to maximize coverage, minimize
overlap, and thus optimize the portfolio.
8. Customer equity is a complementary concept to
brand equity that reflects the sum of lifetime values of
all customers for a brand.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Are Brand Extensions Good or Bad?

Marketing Discussion
Brand Equity Models

Some critics vigorously denounce the practice of brand
extensions, because they feel that too often companies lose
focus and consumers become confused. Other experts
maintain that brand extensions are a critical growth strategy
and source of revenue for the firm.
Take a position: Brand extensions can endanger
brands versus Brand extensions are an important
brand-growth strategy.

How can you relate the different models of brand equity in
this chapter to each other? How are they similar? How are
they different? Can you construct a brand-equity model that
incorporates the best aspects of each model?

Marketing Excellence

>>Procter & Gamble

the doors to new product categories. Among these were
Richardson-Vicks (makers of personal care products like
Pantene, Olay, and Vicks), Norwich Eaton Pharmaceuticals
(makers of Pepto-Bismol), Gillette, Noxell (makers of
Noxzema), Shulton’s Old Spice, Max Factor, and the Iams
Company.
Today, P&G is one of the most skillful marketers of
consumer packaged goods in the world and holds one of
the most powerful portfolios of trusted brands. The company employs 138,000 people in more than 80 countries
worldwide and has total worldwide sales of more than
$79 billion a year. It is the leader in 15 of the 21 product
categories in which it competes, has 23 billion-dollar
global brands, spends more than $2 billion annually on
R&D, and serves more than 4 billion people in 180 different countries. Its sustained market leadership rests on a
number of capabilities and philosophies:
•

Procter & Gamble (P&G) began in 1837 when brothers-inlaw William Procter and James Gamble, whose wives were
sisters, formed a small candle and soap company. From
there, P&G innovated and launched scores of revolutionary
products of superior quality and value, including Ivory soap
in 1882, Tide laundry detergent in 1946, Crest toothpaste
with fluoride in 1955, and Pampers disposable diapers in
1961. P&G also acquired a number of companies to open

Customer knowledge. P&G studies its customers—

both end consumers and trade partners—through
continuous marketing research and intelligence
gathering. It spends more than $100 million on over
10,000 formal consumer research projects every
year and generates more than 3 million consumer
contacts via its e-mail and phone center. It also
emphasizes getting its marketers and researchers
out into the field, where they can interact with consumers and retailers in their natural environment.

270

•

•

•

•

•

•

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Long-term outlook. P&G takes the time to analyze

each opportunity carefully and prepare the best product, then commits itself to making this product a success. It struggled with Pringles potato chips for almost
a decade before achieving market success. Recently,
P&G has focused on increasing its presence in developing markets by concentrating on affordability, brand
awareness, and distribution through e-commerce and
high frequency stores.
Product innovation. P&G is an active product innovator, devoting $2 billion annually to research and development, an impressively high amount for a packagedgoods company. It employs more science PhDs than
Harvard, Berkeley, and MIT combined and applies for
roughly 3,800 patents each year. Part of its innovation
process is to develop brands that offer new consumer
benefits. Recent innovations that created entirely new
categories include Febreze, an odor-eliminating fabric
spray; Dryel, a product that helps “dry-clean” clothes
at home in the dryer; and Swiffer, a cleaning system
that more effectively removes dust, dirt, and hair from
floors and other hard surfaces.
Quality strategy. P&G designs products of aboveaverage quality and continuously improves them in
ways that matter to consumers, including Tide compact detergents, Pampers Rash Guard (a diaper that
treats and prevents diaper rash), and improved two-inone shampoo and conditioner products for Pantene,
Vidal Sassoon, and Pert Plus.
Brand extension strategy. P&G produces its brands in
several sizes and forms. This strategy gains more shelf
space and prevents competitors from moving in to
satisfy unmet market needs. P&G also uses its strong
brand names to launch new products with instant
recognition and much less advertising outlay. The
Mr. Clean brand has been extended from household
cleaner to bathroom cleaner, and even to a carwash
system. Old Spice extended its brand from men’s fragrances to deodorant. Crest successfully extended
into a tooth-whitening system called Crest Whitestrips
that removes surface stains from teeth in 14 days.
Multibrand strategy. P&G markets several brands in the
same product category, such as Luvs and Pampers diapers and Oral-B and Crest toothbrushes. Each brand
meets a different consumer want and competes against
specific competitors’ brands. At the same time, P&G is
careful not to sell too many brands and has reduced its
vast array of products, sizes, flavors, and varieties in recent years to assemble a stronger brand portfolio.
Communication pioneer. With its acquisition of
Gillette, P&G became the nation’s largest advertiser,
spending over $2.3 billion a year or nearly twice as
much as the number two company, General Motors
Corp. P&G pioneered the power of television to

create strong consumer awareness and preference.
In recent years, the company has shifted more of its
advertising budget to online marketing efforts and
social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and blogs.
These efforts help infuse stronger emotional appeals into its communications and create deeper
consumer connections.
•
Aggressive sales force. P&G’s sales force has been
named one of the top 25 by Sales & Marketing
Management magazine. A key to its success is the
close ties its sales force forms with retailers, notably
Walmart. The 150-person team that serves the retail
giant works closely with Walmart to improve both the
products that go to the stores and the process by
which they get there.
•
Manufacturing efficiency and cost cutting. P&G’s reputation as a great marketing company is matched by
its excellence as a manufacturing company. P&G
spends significant amounts developing and improving production operations to keep its costs among
the lowest in the industry, allowing it to reduce the
premium prices at which some of its goods sell.
•
Brand-management system. P&G originated the
brand-management system, in which one executive is responsible for each brand. The system has
been copied by many competitors but not often
with P&G’s success. Recently, P&G modified its
general management structure so each brand category is now run by a category manager with volume and profit responsibility. Although this new
organization does not replace the brand-management system, it helps to sharpen strategic focus
on key consumer needs and competition in the
category.
P&G’s accomplishments over the past 173 years have
come from successfully orchestrating the myriad factors
that contribute to market leadership.
Questions
1. P&G’s impressive portfolio includes some of the
strongest brand names in the world. What are some
of the challenges and risks associated with being the
market leader in so many categories?
2. With social media becoming increasingly important
and fewer people watching traditional commercials
on television, what does P&G need to do to maintain
its strong brand images?
3. What risks do you feel P&G will face going forward?
Sources: Robert Berner, “Detergent Can Be So Much More,” BusinessWeek, May 1, 2006,
pp. 66–68; “A Post-Modern Proctoid,” The Economist, April 15, 2006, p. 68; P&G Fact Sheet
(December 2006); John Galvin, “The World on a String,” Point (February 2005), pp. 13–24;
Jack Neff, “P&G Kisses Up to the Boss: Consumers,” Advertising Age, May 2, 2005, p. 18;
www.pg.com; “The Nielsen Company Issues Top Ten U.S. Lists for 2008,” The Nielsen
Company press release, December 12, 2008.

CREATING BRAND EQUITY

Marketing Excellence

>>McDonald’s

McDonald’s is the world’s leading hamburger fast-food
chain, with over 32,000 restaurants in 118 countries.
More than 75 percent of McDonald’s restaurants are
owned and operated by franchisees, which decreases
the risk associated with expansion and ensures longterm tenants for the company. McDonald’s serves
58 million people each day and promises a simple, easy,
and enjoyable food experience for its customers.
The history of the McDonald’s Corporation dates
back to 1955 when Ray Kroc, a multimixer salesman,
franchised a hamburger restaurant from the McDonald
brothers, named it McDonald’s, and offered simple foods
such as the famous 15 cent hamburger. Kroc helped design the building, which featured red and white sides and
a single golden arch to attract local attention. Ten years
later, 700 McDonald’s restaurants existed around the
country, and the brand was on its way to becoming a
household name.
During the 1960s and 1970s, Kroc led McDonald’s
growth domestically and internationally while pushing the
importance of quality, service, cleanliness, and value. The
menu expanded to include the Big Mac, Quarter
Pounder, Happy Meal, Filet-O-Fish, and breakfast items
like the Egg McMuffin. Kroc also understood early on that
his core audience consisted of children and families.
Therefore, he focused McDonald’s advertising efforts at
these groups and introduced Ronald McDonald in 1965
during a 60-second commercial. Soon, characters such
as Grimace, the Hamburgler, and Mayor McCheese
made their debut in McDonald’s advertising campaigns
and helped lure children into its restaurants for simple,
good-tasting food, and a fun experience.
It was also during this time that McDonald’s created
the Ronald McDonald House, which opened in 1974 to

| CHAPTER 9

271

help children with leukemia. Since then, it has expanded
into a global charity effort called Ronald McDonald House
Charities that strives to improve children’s lives, health,
and well-being through three major programs: Ronald
McDonald House, Ronald McDonald Family Room, and
Ronald McDonald Care Mobile.
McDonald’s aggressively expanded overseas
throughout the 1980s by adding locations throughout
Europe, Asia, the Philippines, and Malaysia. This rapid
expansion, however, led to many struggles during the
1990s and early 2000s. The company lost focus and direction, expanding by as many as 2,000 new restaurants
a year. New employees weren’t trained fast or well
enough, all of which led to poor customer service and
dirtier restaurants. New competitors popped up and the
company acquired nonburger companies, Chipotle and
Boston Market (which were eventually sold in 2006 and
2007). Consumer tastes changed, and new products
like pizza, the Arch Deluxe, and deli sandwiches failed to
connect with consumers, as did tweaks to the current
menu including multiple changes to the Big Mac special
sauce. Jim Skinner, McDonald’s chief executive explained, “We got distracted from the most important
thing: hot, high-quality food at a great value at the speed
and convenience of McDonald’s.”
In 2003, McDonald’s implemented a strategic effort
called the “Plan to Win.” The framework, which still exists
today, helped McDonald’s restaurants refocus on offering
a better, higher-quality consumer experience rather than a
quick and cheap fast-food option. The Plan to Win “playbook” provided strategic insight on how to improve on the
company’s 5 Ps—people, products, promotions, price,
and place—yet allowed local restaurants to adapt to different environments and cultures. For example, McDonald’s
introduced a Bacon Roll breakfast sandwich in the United
Kingdom, a premium M burger in France, and an egg,
tomato, and pepper McPuff in China. Prices also varied
slightly across the United States to better reflect different
tastes in different regions.
Some food changes that helped turn the company
around included offering more chicken options as beef
consumption started to decline, selling milk in a bottle instead of a carton, and removing “Super Size” options after the documentary Super Size Me targeted McDonald’s
and its link to obesity. McDonald’s responded to health
trends and began offering premium salads as well as apple slices instead of French fries in Happy Meals as well as
all-white-meat McNuggets. While many of the healthier
options targeted moms and held a premium price,
McDonald’s introduced the $1 menu at the same time,
which targeted the lower-income bracket and teenagers.
Other responses included improving drive-thru service

272

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

since 60 percent of McDonald’s U.S. business came
from drive-thrus, introducing more snack options, and
refurbishing restaurants with leather seats, warmer paint
colors, and flat-screen TVs. Initial results were staggering;
from 2003 to 2006, the stock price increased 170 percent.
Sales continued to increase through the late 2000s and
topped $23.5 billion in 2008, making McDonald’s one of
only two companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average
whose share price rose in 2008.
McDonald’s continued to flourish in 2009, led by its
premium Angus burgers and its McCafé coffee line, which
directly targeted competitors like Starbucks with less
expensive specialty coffee drinks. McDonald’s also
launched a worldwide repackaging effort as a result of intense consumer research. The new packaging aimed to
accomplish several tasks, including teaching consumers
about McDonald’s health consciousness and building
awareness of its use of locally grown produce. It included
bold text and full-color photographs of real ingredients like
potatoes on French fry packaging and vegetables,
cheese, and cooking utensils on hamburger packaging.
Mary Dillon, McDonald’s global chief marketing officer, explained that the goal is to “create unique personalities for
our menu items by telling a story about each one.”

Through the years, McDonald’s has created a number of successful marketing campaigns and slogans
such as “You Deserve a Break Today,” “It’s a Good Time
for the Great Taste of McDonald’s,” and “Food, Folks,
and Fun.” Its current campaign, “I’m Lovin’ It,” seems on
track to join the others by helping the company reach
record sales and growth despite difficult economic
times.
Questions
1. What are McDonald’s core brand values? Have these
changed over the years?
2. McDonald’s did very well during the recession in the
late 2000s. With the economy turning around for the
better, should McDonald’s change its strategy? Why
or why not?
3. What risks do you feel McDonald’s will face going
forward?
Sources: Andrew Martin, “At McDonald’s, the Happiest Meal Is Hot Profits,” New York Times,
January 10, 2009; Janet Adamy, “McDonald’s Seeks Way to Keep Sizzling,” Wall Street
Journal, March 10, 2009; Matt Vella, “McDonald’s Thinks About the Box,” BusinessWeek,
December 8, 2008; Jessica Wohl, “McDonald’s CEO: Tough Economy, but Some ‘Thawing,’”
Reuters, April 17, 2009; “McDonald’s Rolls Out New Generation of Global Packaging,”
McDonald’s press release, October 28, 2008.

This page intentionally left blank

274

PART 4

r
e
t
ap
h
C

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

10

In This Chapter, We Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How can a firm develop and establish an effective
positioning in the market?
2. How do marketers identify and analyze
competition?
3. How are brands successfully differentiated?
4. What are the differences in positioning and branding with a small
business?

With distinctive packaging and a
compelling product concept, Method has
carved out a unique spot in the previously
staid cleaning-products market.

Crafting the Brand
Positioning
No company can win if its products and services resemble every other
product and offering. As part of the strategic brand management process, each offering must
represent the right kinds of things in the minds of the target market. Although successfully
positioning a new product in a well-established market may seem difficult, Method Products
shows that it is not impossible.

Named the seventh fastest-growing company in the United States by Inc. magazine back
in 2006, Method Products is the brainchild of former high school buddies Eric Ryan and
Adam Lowry. The company started with the realization that although cleaning and household products is a huge category, taking up an entire supermarket aisle or more, it was
an incredibly boring one. Ryan and Lowry designed a sleek, uncluttered dish soap container that also had a functional advantage—the bottle, shaped like a chess piece, was built to let soap
flow out the bottom, so users would never have to turn it upside down. This signature product, with its
pleasant fragrance, was designed by award-winning industrial designer Karim Rashid. “The cleaning
product industry is very backwards, and many of the products have a 1950s language,” Rashid said,
“They are cluttered with graphics, too much information, and complicated ugly forms.”
By creating a line of nontoxic, biodegradable household cleaning products with bright colors and
sleek designs totally unique to the category, Method has crossed the line of $100 million in revenues
with a phenomenal growth rate. Its big break came with the placement
of its product in Target, known for partnering with well-known designAs the success of Method products demonstrates, a
ers to produce stand-out products at affordable prices. Because of a
company can reap the benefits of carving out a unique position in
limited advertising budget, the company believes its attractive the marketplace. Creating a compelling, well-differentiated
packaging and innovative products must work harder to express brand position requires a keen understanding of consumer needs
the brand positioning. The challenge for Method now, however, is to and wants, company capabilities, and competitive actions. It also
differentiate beyond design to avoid copycats eroding the company’s requires disciplined but creative thinking. In this chapter, we
cachet. The company is capitalizing on growing interest in green outline a process by which marketers can uncover the most
products by emphasizing its nontoxic, nonpolluting ingredients.1
powerful brand positioning.

Developing and Establishing
a Brand Positioning
All marketing strategy is built on segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP). A company
discovers different needs and groups in the marketplace, targets those it can satisfy in a superior way, and then positions its offerings so the target market recognizes the company’s
distinctive offerings and images.
275

276

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Positioning is the act of designing a company’s offering and image to occupy a distinctive place
in the minds of the target market.2 The goal is to locate the brand in the minds of consumers
to maximize the potential benefit to the firm. A good brand positioning helps guide marketing
strategy by clarifying the brand’s essence, identifying the goals it helps the consumer achieve, and
showing how it does so in a unique way. Everyone in the organization should understand the brand
positioning and use it as context for making decisions.

Entertainment Weekly When publisher Scott Donaton took over
Entertainment Weekly, he repositioned the magazine away from celebrity lifestyles to focus
more directly on entertainment itself and what actually appeared on the screen, page, or
CD. This updated positioning became a filter that guided the content and marketing of the
magazine: “Every event, sales program, marketing initiative gets poured through that
filter—the goal being to keep and enhance the things that are true to who you are; kill the
things that aren’t, necessarily; and create great new things that are even better expressions of who you are.” Out was the glitzy annual Oscar party at Elaine’s restaurant in
New York City; in its place was a week-long Academy Awards program at ArcLight
Theater in Hollywood showcasing all the best-pictures nominees and featuring a panel
discussion with nominated screenwriters.3
A good positioning has a “foot in the present” and a “foot in the future.” It needs
to be somewhat aspirational so the brand has room to grow and improve.
Positioning on the basis of the current state of the market is not forward-looking
enough, but, at the same time, the positioning cannot be so removed from reality
that it is essentially unobtainable. The real trick in positioning is to strike just the
right balance between what the brand is and what it could be.
The result of positioning is the successful creation of a customer-focused
value proposition, a cogent reason why the target market should buy the product.
Table 10.1 shows how three companies—Perdue, Volvo, and Domino’s—have
defined their value proposition through the years given their target customers,
benefits, and prices.4
Positioning requires that marketers define and communicate similarities and
differences between their brand and its competitors. Specifically, deciding on a
positioning requires: (1) determining a frame of reference by identifying the
target market and relevant competition, (2) identifying the optimal points of
parity and points of difference brand associations given that frame of reference,
and (3) creating a brand mantra to summarize the positioning and essence of
the brand.
Entertainment Weekly uses its
updated brand positioning to guide
everything it does.

TABLE 10.1

Determining a Competitive Frame of Reference
The competitive frame of reference defines which other brands a brand competes with and therefore which brands should be the focus of competitive analysis. Decisions about the competitive

Examples of Value Propositions

Company and Product

Target Customers

Key Benefits

Price

Value Proposition

Perdue (chicken)

Quality-conscious consumers
of chicken

Tenderness

10% premium

More tender golden chicken at a
moderate premium price

Volvo (station wagon)

Safety-conscious upscale
families

Durability and safety

20% premium

The safest, most durable wagon in
which your family can ride

Domino’s (pizza)

Convenience-minded pizza
lovers

Delivery speed and
good quality

15% premium

A good hot pizza, delivered promptly
to your door, at a moderate price

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

frame of reference are closely linked to target market decisions. Deciding to target a certain type of
consumer can define the nature of competition, because certain firms have decided to target that
segment in the past (or plan to do so in the future), or because consumers in that segment may already look to certain products or brands in their purchase decisions.

IDENTIFYING COMPETITORS A good starting point in defining a competitive frame of
reference for brand positioning is to determine category membership—the products or sets of
products with which a brand competes and which function as close substitutes. It would seem a
simple task for a company to identify its competitors. PepsiCo knows Coca-Cola’s Dasani is a major
bottled-water competitor for its Aquafina brand; Citigroup knows Bank of America is a major
banking competitor; and Petsmart.com knows a major online retail competitor for pet food and
supplies is Petco.com.
The range of a company’s actual and potential competitors, however, can be much broader than
the obvious. For a brand with explicit growth intentions to enter new markets, a broader or maybe
even more aspirational competitive frame may be necessary to reflect possible future competitors.
And a company is more likely to be hurt by emerging competitors or new technologies than by current competitors.
•

•

After having spent billions of dollars building their networks, cell phone carriers AT&T,
Verizon Wireless, and Sprint face the threat of new competition emerging as a result of a number of changes in the marketplace: Skype and the growth of Wi-Fi hotspots, municipal Wi-Fi
networks built by cities, dual mode phones that can easily switch networks, and the opening
up of the old analog 700 MHz frequency used for UHF broadcasts.5
The energy-bar market created by PowerBar ultimately fragmented into a variety of subcategories, including those directed at specific segments (such as Luna bars for women) and some
possessing specific attributes (such as the protein-laden Balance and the calorie-control bar
Pria). Each represented a subcategory for which the original PowerBar was potentially not as
relevant.6

Firms should identify their competitive frame in the most advantageous way possible. In the
United Kingdom, for example, the Automobile Association positioned itself as the fourth “emergency service”—along with police, fire, and ambulance—to convey greater credibility and urgency.
Consider the competitive frame adopted by Bertolli.7

The energy bar market has
fragmented into a number of
sub-categories, each appealing
to different people in different
situations.

277

278

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Bertolli

Bertolli

Unilever’s Bertolli, a line of frozen Italian food, experienced a steady 10 percent growth in sales through the recent economic recession, in part due to its clever positioning
as “restaurant quality Italian food that you can eat at home.” Targeting men and women with
“discerning palates,” Bertolli has aggressively innovated with a stream of high-quality new dishes
to keep target customers interested. In its marketing for the brand, Bertolli deliberately chooses
to go to places “appropriate for a fine dining brand but not a frozen food brand.” Advertising “Spend a Night
In with Bertolli,” the brand has advertised during the Emmys and Golden Globes award show telecasts and
hosted celebrity chef dinners in Manhattan.
We can examine competition from both an industry and a market point of view.8 An industry
is a group of firms offering a product or class of products that are close substitutes for one another.
Marketers classify industries according to number of sellers; degree of product differentiation;
presence or absence of entry, mobility, and exit barriers; cost structure; degree of vertical integration; and degree of globalization.
Using the market approach, we define competitors as companies that satisfy the same
customer need. For example, a customer who buys a word-processing package really wants
“writing ability”—a need that can also be satisfied by pencils, pens, or, in the past, typewriters.
Marketers must overcome “marketing myopia” and stop defining competition in traditional
category and industry terms.9 Coca-Cola, focused on its soft drink business, missed seeing the
market for coffee bars and fresh-fruit-juice bars that eventually impinged on its soft-drink
business.
The market concept of competition reveals a broader set of actual and potential competitors than competition defined in just product category terms. Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard
J. Jaworski suggest profiling a company’s direct and indirect competitors by mapping
the buyer’s steps in obtaining and using the product. This type of analysis highlights both the
opportunities and the challenges a company faces.10 “Marketing Insight: High Growth through
Value Innovation” describes how firms can tap into new markets while minimizing competition
from others.

Marketing Insight
High Growth Through Value
Innovation
INSEAD professors W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne believe too
many firms engage in “red-ocean thinking”—seeking bloody, headto-head battles with competitors based largely on incremental improvements in cost, quality, or both. They advocate engaging in
“blue-ocean thinking” by creating products and services for which
there are no direct competitors. Instead of searching within the conventional boundaries of industry competition, managers should look
beyond those boundaries to find unoccupied market positions that
represent real value innovation.
The authors cite as one example Bert Claeys, a Belgian
company that operates movie theaters, and its introduction of the

25-screen, 7,600-seat Kinepolis megaplex. Despite an industry
slump, Kinepolis has thrived on a unique combination of features,
such as ample and safe free parking; large screens and state-ofthe-art sound and projection equipment; and roomy, comfortable,
oversized seats with unobstructed views. Through smart planning
and economies of scale, Bert Claeys created Kinepolis’s unique cinema experience at a lower cost.
This is classic blue-ocean thinking—designing creative business ventures to positively affect both a company’s cost structure
and its value proposition to consumers. Cost savings result from
eliminating and reducing the factors affecting traditional industry
competition; value to consumers comes from introducing factors the
industry has never before offered. Over time, costs drop even more
as superior value leads to higher sales volume, and that generates
economies of scale.
Here are other marketers that exhibit unconventional, blue-ocean
thinking:
•

•

Callaway Golf designed “Big Bertha,” a golf club with a large head
and expanded sweet spot that helped golfers frustrated by the difficulty of hitting a golf ball squarely.
NetJets figured out how to offer private jet service to a larger group
of customers through fractional ownership.

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

Cirque du Soleil reinvented circus as a higher form of entertainment by eliminating high-cost elements such as animals and enhancing the theatrical experience instead.
Kim and Mauborgne propose four crucial questions for marketers
to ask themselves in guiding blue-ocean thinking and creating value
innovation:
•

1.
2.
3.

Which of the factors that our industry takes for granted
should we eliminate?
Which factors should we reduce well below the industry’s
standard?
Which factors should we raise well above the industry’s
standard?

4.

Sources: W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne, Blue-Ocean Strategy: How to
Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2005); W. Chan Kim and
Renée Mauborgne, “Creating New Market Space,” Harvard Business
Review, January–February 1999; W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne, “Value
Innovation: The Strategic Logic of High Growth,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1997.

Customers’ Ratings of Competitors on Key Success
Factors
Customer
Awareness

Product
Quality

Product
Availability

Technical
Assistance

Selling Staff

Competitor A

E

E

P

P

G

Competitor B

G

G

E

G

E

Competitor C

F

P

G

F

F

Note: E = excellent, G = good, F = fair, P = poor.

279

Which factors should we create that the industry has never
offered?
They maintain that the most successful blue-ocean thinkers took
advantage of all three platforms on which value innovation can take
place: physical product; service including maintenance, customer service, warranties, and training for distributors and retailers; and delivery,
meaning channels and logistics.

ANALYZING COMPETITORS Chapter 2 described how to conduct a SWOT analysis
that includes a competitive analysis. A company needs to gather information about
each competitor’s real and perceived strengths and weaknesses.
Table 10.2 shows the
results of a company survey that asked customers to rate its three competitors, A, B, and
C, on five attributes. Competitor A turns out to be well known and respected for
producing high-quality products sold by a good sales force, but poor at providing product
availability and technical assistance. Competitor B is good across the board and excellent
in product availability and sales force. Competitor C rates poor to fair on most attributes.
This result suggests that in its positioning, the company could attack Competitor A on
product availability and technical assistance and Competitor C on almost anything, but it
should not attack B, which has no glaring weaknesses. As part of this competitive analysis for
positioning, the firm should also ascertain the strategies and objectives of its primary
competitors.11
Once a company has identified its main competitors and their strategies, it must ask: What is
each competitor seeking in the marketplace? What drives each competitor’s behavior? Many factors
shape a competitor’s objectives, including size, history, current management, and financial situation. If the competitor is a division of a larger company, it’s important to know whether the parent
company is running it for growth or for profits, or milking it.12
Finally, based on all this analysis, marketers must formally define the competitive frame of
reference to guide positioning. In stable markets with little short-term change likely, it may be
fairly easy to define one, two, or perhaps three key competitors. In dynamic categories where
competition may exist or arise in a variety of different forms, multiple frames of reference may
arise, as we discuss next.

TABLE 10.2

| CHAPTER 10

280

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Identifying Optimal Points-of-Difference
and Points-of-Parity
Once marketers have fixed the competitive frame of reference for positioning by defining the customer target market and the nature of the competition, they can define the appropriate points-ofdifference and points-of-parity associations.13

POINTS-OF-DIFFERENCE Points-of-difference (PODs) are attributes or benefits that
consumers strongly associate with a brand, positively evaluate, and believe they could not find to
the same extent with a competitive brand. Associations that make up points-of-difference may be
based on virtually any type of attribute or benefit. Strong brands may have multiple points-ofdifference. Some examples are Apple (design, ease-of-use, and irreverent attitude), Nike
(performance, innovative technology, and winning), and Southwest Airlines (value, reliability, and
fun personality). Creating strong, favorable, and unique associations is a real challenge, but an
essential one for competitive brand positioning.
Three criteria determine whether a brand association can truly function as a point-of-difference—
desirability, deliverability, and differentiability. Some key considerations follow.
•

•

•

Desirable to consumer. Consumers must see the brand association as personally relevant to
them. The Westin Stamford hotel in Singapore advertised that it was the world’s tallest hotel,
but a hotel’s height is not important to many tourists. Consumers must also be given a compelling reason to believe and an understandable rationale for why the brand can deliver the desired benefit. Mountain Dew may argue that it is more energizing than other soft drinks and
support this claim by noting that it has a higher level of caffeine. Chanel No. 5 perfume may
claim to be the quintessentially elegant French perfume and support this claim by noting the
long association between Chanel and haute couture. Substantiators can also come in the form
of patented, branded ingredients, such as NIVEA Wrinkle Control Crème with Q10 co-enzyme
or Herbal Essences hair conditioner with Hawafena.
Deliverable by the company. The company must have the internal resources and commitment
to feasibly and profitably create and maintain the brand association in the minds of consumers. The product design and marketing offering must support the desired association.
Does communicating the desired association require real changes to the product itself, or just
perceptual shifts in the way the consumer thinks of the product or brand? Creating the latter is
typically easier. General Motors has had to work to overcome public perceptions that Cadillac
is not a youthful, modern brand and has done so through bold designs and contemporary images. The ideal brand association is preemptive, defensible, and difficult to attack. It is generally easier for market leaders such as ADM, Visa, and SAP to sustain their positioning, based as
it is on demonstrable product or service performance, than it is for market leaders such as
Fendi, Prada, and Hermès, whose positioning is based on fashion and is thus subject to the
whims of a more fickle market.
Differentiating from competitors. Finally, consumers must see the brand association as distinctive and superior to relevant competitors. Splenda sugar substitute overtook Equal and
Sweet’N Low to become the leader in its category in 2003 by differentiating itself on its authenticity as a product derived from sugar, without any of the associated drawbacks.14

Any attribute or benefit associated with a product or service can function as a point-of-difference for a brand as long as it is sufficiently desirable, deliverable, and differentiating. The brand
must demonstrate clear superiority on an attribute or benefit, however, for it to function as a true
point-of-difference. Consumers must be convinced, for example, that Louis Vuitton has the most
stylish handbags, Energizer is the longest-lasting battery, and Fidelity Investments offers the best
financial advice and planning.

POINTS-OF-PARITY Points-of-parity (POPs), on the other hand, are attribute or benefit
associations that are not necessarily unique to the brand but may in fact be shared with other
brands.15 These types of associations come in two basic forms: category and competitive.
Category points-of-parity are attributes or benefits that consumers view as essential to a legitimate and credible offering within a certain product or service category. In other words, they represent necessary—but not sufficient—conditions for brand choice. Consumers might not consider a

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

281

Miller Lite

travel agency truly a travel agency unless it is able to make air and hotel reservations, provide advice
about leisure packages, and offer various ticket payment and delivery options. Category points-ofparity may change over time due to technological advances, legal developments, or consumer
trends, but to use a golfing analogy, they are the “greens fees” necessary to play the marketing game.
Competitive points-of-parity are associations designed to overcome perceived weaknesses of the
brand. A competitive point-of-parity may be required to either (1) negate competitors’ perceived
points-of-difference or (2) negate a perceived vulnerability of the brand as a result of its own
points-of-difference. The latter consideration, which we discuss in more detail later in this chapter,
arises when consumers feel that if a brand is good at one thing (easy to use), it must not be good at
something else (having advanced features).
One good way to uncover key competitive points-of-parity is to role-play competitors’ positioning and infer their intended points-of-difference. Competitor’s PODs will, in turn, suggest the
brand’s POPs. Consumer research into the trade-offs consumers make in their purchasing decisions can also be informative.
Regardless of the source of perceived weaknesses, if, in the eyes of consumers, a brand can
“break even” in those areas where it appears to be at a disadvantage and achieve advantages in other
areas, the brand should be in a strong—and perhaps unbeatable—competitive position. Consider
the introduction of Miller Lite beer–the first major light beer in North America.16

Miller Lite The initial advertising strategy for Miller Lite beer had two goals—

ensuring parity with key competitors in the regular, full-strength beer category by stating that
it “tastes great,” while at the same time creating a point-of-difference: It contained one-third
fewer calories and was thus “less filling.” As is often the case, the point-of-parity and point-ofdifference were somewhat conflicting, as consumers tend to equate taste with calories. To
overcome potential resistance, Miller employed credible spokespeople, primarily popular former professional athletes, who would presumably not drink a beer unless it tasted good. These ex-jocks humorously
debated which of the two product benefits—“tastes great” or “less filling”—was more descriptive of the
beer. The ads ended with the clever tagline “Everything You’ve Always Wanted in a Beer . . . and Less.”

POINTS-OF-PARITY VERSUS POINTS-OF-DIFFERENCE For an offering to achieve a
point-of-parity on a particular attribute or benefit, a sufficient number of consumers must believe
the brand is “good enough” on that dimension. There is a zone or range of tolerance or acceptance
with points-of-parity. The brand does not literally need to be seen as equal to competitors, but
consumers must feel it does well enough on that particular attribute or benefit. If they do, they may
be willing to base their evaluations and decisions on other factors potentially more favorable to the
brand. A light beer presumably would never taste as good as a full-strength beer, but it would need
to taste close enough to be able to effectively compete.
Often, the key to positioning is not so much achieving a point-of-difference as achieving points-of-parity!

Visa versus American
Express Visa’s POD in the credit
card category is that it is the most widely
available card, which underscores the category’s main benefit of convenience.
American Express, on the other hand, has built the equity of its brand by highlighting the prestige associated
with the use of its card. Having established their PODs,
Visa and American Express now compete to create
POPs by attempting to blunt each other’s advantage.
Visa offers gold and platinum cards to enhance the
prestige of its brand and for years advertised, “It’s
Everywhere You Want to Be,” showing desirable travel

Visa has established a strong
point-of-difference versus
American Express on the basis of
acceptability.

282

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

and leisure locations that accepted only the Visa card, to reinforce both its exclusivity and its acceptability. American Express has substantially increased the number of merchants that accept its cards and created other value enhancements while also reinforcing its cachet through advertising that showcases
celebrities such as Jerry Seinfeld, Robert De Niro, Tina Fey, Ellen DeGeneres, and Beyoncé.

MULTIPLE FRAMES OF REFERENCE It is not uncommon for a brand to identify more
than one actual or potential competitive frame of reference, if competition widens or the firm
plans to expand into new categories. For example, Starbucks could define very distinct sets of
competitors, suggesting different possible POPs and PODs as a result:
1.

2.
3.

Quick-serve restaurants and convenience shops (McDonald’s and Dunkin' Donuts). Intended
PODs might be quality, image, experience, and variety; intended POPs might be convenience
and value.
Supermarket brands for home consumption (Folgers and NESCAFÉ). Intended PODs might be
quality, image, experience, variety, and freshness; intended POPs might be convenience and value.
Local cafés. Intended PODs might be convenience and service quality; intended POPs might
be quality, variety, price, and community.

Note that some potential POPs and PODs for Starbucks are shared across competitors; others are
unique to a particular competitor.
Under such circumstances, marketers have to decide what to do. There are two main options
with multiple frames of reference. One is to first develop the best possible positioning for each type
or class of competitors and then see whether there is a way to create one combined positioning
robust enough to effectively address them all. If competition is too diverse, however, it may be
necessary to prioritize competitors and then choose the most important set of competitors to serve
as the competitive frame. One crucial consideration is not to try to be all things to all people—that
leads to lowest-common-denominator positioning, which is typically ineffective.
Starbucks has encountered some
stiff competition in the coffee
market in recent years from
McDonald’s and Dunkin’ Donuts.

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

Finally, if there are many competitors in different categories or subcategories, it may be useful to
either develop the positioning at the categorical level for all relevant categories (“quick-serve
restaurants” or “supermarket take-home coffee” for Starbucks) or with an exemplar from each
category (McDonald’s or NESCAFÉ for Starbucks).

BMW

STRADDLE POSITIONING Occasionally, a company will be able to straddle two frames
of reference with one set of points-of-difference and points-of-parity. In these cases, the pointsof-difference for one category become points-of-parity for the other and vice versa. Subway
restaurants are positioned as offering healthy, good-tasting sandwiches. This positioning allows
the brand to create a POP on taste and a POD on health with respect to quick-serve restaurants
such as McDonald’s and Burger King and, at the same time, a POP on health and a POD on
taste with respect to health food restaurants and cafés. Straddle positions allow brands to
expand their market coverage and potential customer base. Another example of a straddle
positioning is BMW.

BMW When BMW first made a strong competitive push into the U.S. market in the

early 1980s, it positioned the brand as the only automobile that offered both luxury and
performance. At that time, consumers saw U.S. luxury cars as lacking performance, and
U.S. performance cars as lacking luxury. By relying on the design of its cars, its German
heritage, and other aspects of a well-conceived marketing program, BMW was able to simultaneously achieve: (1) a point-of-difference on luxury and a point-of-parity on performance with
respect to U.S. performance cars like the Chevy Corvette, and (2) a point-of-difference on performance and a point-of-parity on luxury with respect to U.S. luxury cars like Cadillac. The clever slogan
“The Ultimate Driving Machine” effectively captured the newly created umbrella category—luxury performance cars.
Although a straddle positioning is often attractive as a means of reconciling potentially conflicting consumer goals and creating a “best of both worlds” solution, it also carries an extra burden. If
the points-of-parity and points-of-difference with respect to both categories are not credible, the
brand may not be viewed as a legitimate player in either category. Many early PDAs that unsuccessfully tried to straddle categories ranging from pagers to laptop computers provide a vivid illustration of this risk.

Choosing POPs and PODs
Marketers typically focus on brand benefits in choosing the points-of-parity and points-of-difference
that make up their brand positioning. Brand attributes generally play more of a supporting role by
providing “reasons to believe” or “proof points” as to why a brand can credibly claim it offers certain
benefits. Marketers of Dove soap, for example, will talk about how its attribute of one-quarter
cleansing cream uniquely creates the benefit of softer skin. Consumers are usually more interested in
benefits and what exactly they will get from a product. Multiple attributes may support a certain
benefit, and they may change over time.
For choosing specific benefits as POPs and PODs to position a brand, perceptual maps may be
useful. Perceptual maps are visual representations of consumer perceptions and preferences. They
provide quantitative portrayals of market situations and the way consumers view different products, services, and brands along various dimensions. By overlaying consumer preferences with
brand perceptions, marketers can reveal “holes” or “openings” that suggest unmet consumer needs
and marketing opportunities.
For example,
Figure 10.1(a) shows a hypothetical perceptual map for a beverage
category. The four brands—A, B, C, and D—vary in terms of how consumers view their taste
profile (light versus strong) and personality and imagery (contemporary versus modern).
Also displayed on the map are ideal point “configurations” for three market segments (1, 2,
and 3). The ideal points represent each segment’s most preferred (“ideal”) combination of
taste and imagery.

| CHAPTER 10

283

284

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Strong
Flavor

Brands: A, B, C, & D

Strong
Flavor

Customer Segments
Ideal Points: 1, 2, & 3

D

Customer Segments
Ideal Points: 1, 2, & 3

D
3

Traditional
Image

1
Contemporary
Image

A

B

3

B

Brands: A, B, C, & D

1
Traditional
Image

Contemporary
Image
A

A’

2

2
C

C

A''

Light
Flavor

Light
Flavor

|Fig. 10.1a|

|Fig. 10.1b|

(a) Hypothetical Beverage Perceptual
Map: Current Perceptions

(b) Hypothetical Beverage Perceptual
Map: Possible Repositioning for Brand A

Consumers in Segment 3 prefer beverages with a strong taste and traditional imagery. Brand D
is well-positioned for this segment as it is strongly associated in the marketplace with both these
benefits. Given that none of the competitors is seen as anywhere close, we would expect Brand D to
attract many of the Segment 3 customers.
Brand A, on the other hand, is seen as more balanced in terms of both taste and imagery.
Unfortunately, no market segment seems to really desire this balance. Brands B and C are better
positioned with respect to Segments 2 and 3, respectively.
•

•

By making its image more contemporary, Brand A could move to A’ to target consumers in
Segment 1 and achieve a point-of-parity on imagery and maintain its point-of-difference on
taste profile with respect to Brand B.
By changing its taste profile to make it lighter, Brand A could move to A’’ to target consumers in
Segment 2 and achieve a point-of-parity on taste profile and maintain its point-of-difference on
imagery with respect to Brand C.

Deciding which repositioning is most promising, A’ or A’’, would require detailed consumer
and competitive analysis on a host of factors—including the resources, capabilities,
and likely intentions of competing firms—to choose the markets where consumers can
profitably be served.

Brand Mantras
To further focus the intent of the brand positioning and the way firms would like consumers
to think about the brand, it is often useful to define a brand mantra.17 A brand mantra is an
articulation of the heart and soul of the brand and is closely related to other branding concepts
like “brand essence” and “core brand promise.” Brand mantras are short, three- to five-word
phrases that capture the irrefutable essence or spirit of the brand positioning. Their purpose is
to ensure that all employees within the organization and all external marketing partners understand what the brand is most fundamentally to represent with consumers so they can adjust
their actions accordingly.

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

285

Nike’s brand mantra of “authentic
athletic performance” guides the
types of products it makes and the
athletes it hires as endorsers.

Brand mantras are powerful devices. They can provide guidance about what products to introduce under the brand, what ad campaigns to run, and where and how to sell the brand. Their
influence, however, can extend beyond these tactical concerns. Brand mantras may even guide
the most seemingly unrelated or mundane decisions, such as the look of a reception area and
the way phones are answered. In effect, they create a mental filter to screen out brand-inappropriate marketing activities or actions of any type that may have a negative bearing on customers’ impressions of a brand.
Brand mantras must economically communicate what the brand is and what it is not. What
makes for a good brand mantra? McDonald’s brand philosophy of “Food, Folks, and Fun” captures
its brand essence and core brand promise. Two high-profile and successful examples—Nike and
Disney—show the power and utility of a well-designed brand mantra.

Nike

Nike has a rich set of associations with consumers, based on its innovative product designs, its sponsorships of top athletes, its award-winning advertising, its competitive
drive, and its irreverent attitude. Internally, Nike marketers adopted the three-word brand
mantra, “authentic athletic performance,” to guide their marketing efforts. Thus, in Nike’s
eyes, its entire marketing program—its products and how they are sold—must reflect those
key brand values. Over the years, Nike has expanded its brand meaning from “running shoes” to “athletic
shoes” to “athletic shoes and apparel” to “all things associated with athletics (including equipment).”
Each step of the way, however, it has been guided by its “authentic athletic performance” brand mantra. For example, as Nike rolled out its
successful apparel line, one important hurdle for the products was that
they could be made innovative enough through material, cut, or design
to truly benefit top athletes. At the same time, the company has been
careful to avoid using the Nike name to brand products that do not fit
with the brand mantra (like casual “brown” shoes).

Disney

Disney

Disney developed its brand mantra in response to its incredible growth through licensing and product development during the mid-1980s. In the late 1980s,
Disney became concerned that some of its characters, such
as Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck, were being used inappropriately and becoming overexposed. The characters were on so many
products and marketed in so many ways that in some cases it was

Disney’s brand mantra of “fun
family entertainment” provides
guardrails so its marketing stays
on track.

286

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

difficult to discern what could have been the rationale behind the deal to start with. Moreover, because of
the broad exposure of the characters in the marketplace, many consumers had begun to feel Disney was
exploiting its name. Disney moved quickly to ensure that a consistent image—reinforcing its key brand
associations—was conveyed by all third-party products and services. To facilitate this supervision,
Disney adopted an internal brand mantra of “fun family entertainment” to serve as a screen for proposed
ventures. Opportunities that were not consistent with the brand mantra—no matter how appealing—
were rejected.

DESIGNING A BRAND MANTRA Brand mantras are designed with internal purposes in
mind. A brand slogan is an external translation that attempts to creatively engage consumers.
Although Nike’s internal mantra was “authentic athletic performance,” its external slogan was “Just
Do It.” Here are the three key criteria for a brand mantra.
•

•
•

Communicate. A good brand mantra should define the category (or categories) of business for the brand and set the brand boundaries. It should also clarify what is unique about
the brand.
Simplify. An effective brand mantra should be memorable. For that, it should be short, crisp,
and vivid in meaning.
Inspire. Ideally, the brand mantra should also stake out ground that is personally meaningful
and relevant to as many employees as possible.

Brand mantras typically are designed to capture the brand’s points-of-difference, that is, what is
unique about the brand. Other aspects of the brand positioning—especially the brand’s pointsof-parity—may also be important and may need to be reinforced in other ways.
For brands facing rapid growth, it is helpful to define the product or benefit space in which
the brand would like to compete, as Nike did with “athletic performance” and Disney with
“family entertainment.” Words that describe the nature of the product or service, or the type of
experiences or benefits the brand provides, can be critical to identifying appropriate categories
into which to extend. For brands in more stable categories where extensions into more distinct
categories are less likely to occur, the brand mantra may focus more exclusively on pointsof-difference.
Brand mantras derive their power and usefulness from their collective meaning. Other brands
may be strong on one, or perhaps even a few, of the brand associations making up the brand
mantra. But for the brand mantra to be effective, no other brand should singularly excel on all dimensions. Part of the key to both Nike’s and Disney’s success is that for years no competitor could
really deliver on the combined promise suggested by their brand mantras.

Establishing Brand Positioning
Once they have determined the brand positioning strategy, marketers should communicate it to
everyone in the organization so it guides their words and actions. One helpful schematic to do so is
a brand-positioning bull’s-eye. Constructing a bull’s-eye for the brand ensures that no steps are
skipped in its development. “Marketing Memo: Constructing a Brand Positioning Bull’s-eye” outlines one way marketers can formally express brand positioning.
Establishing the brand positioning in the marketplace requires that consumers understand
what the brand offers and what makes it a superior competitive choice. To do so, consumers need
to understand in which category or categories it competes and its points-of-parity and points-ofdifference with respect to those competitors.
Category membership may be obvious in some cases. Target customers are aware
that Maybelline is a leading brand of cosmetics, Cheerios is a leading brand of cereal,
Accenture is a leading consulting firm, and so on. Often, however, marketers for many other
brands must inform consumers of a brand’s category membership. Perhaps the most obvious
situation is the introduction of new products, especially when category identification itself is
not apparent.
Category membership can be a special problem for high-tech products. When GO
Corporation created the first pen-based tablet computer in the early 1990s, analysts and the

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

marketing

A brand bull’s-eye provides content and context to improve everyone’s
understanding of the positioning of a brand in the organization. Here we
describe the components of a brand bull’s-eye, illustrating with a hypothetical
Starbucks example.
In the inner two circles is the heart of the bull’s-eye—key points-of-parity
and points-of-difference, as well as the brand mantra. In the next circle out
are the substantiators or reasons-to-believe (RTB)—attributes or benefits
that provide factual or demonstrable support for the points-of-parity and
points-of-difference. Finally, the outer circle contains two other useful branding concepts: (1) the brand values, personality, or character—intangible
associations that help to establish the tone for the words and actions for the
Consumer
Target

e
Valu

Discerning
coffee
drinker

Coffee and the
drinking
experience is
often
unsatisfying

brand; and (2) executional properties and visual identity—more tangible
components of the brand that affect how it is seen.
Three boxes outside the bull’s-eye provide useful context and interpretation. To the left, two boxes highlight some of the input to the positioning
analysis: One includes the consumer target and a key insight about consumer attitudes or behavior that significantly influenced the actual positioning; the other box provides competitive information about the key consumer
need the brand is attempting to satisfy and some competitive products or
brands that need suggests. To the right of the bull’s-eye, one box offers a
“big picture” view of the output—the ideal consumer takeaway that would
result if the brand positioning efforts were successful.

s/Personality/Charact
Contemporary

er

Substantiators
(RTB)
Thoughtful

Caring

24-hour
training of
baristas

s–of–parity
Point
Fairly
Priced

Responsible,
locally involved

Stock options/
health benefits
for baristas

Brand
Mantra
Consumer
Need State
Desire for
better coffee
and a better
consumption
experience

Relaxing,
Rich, Rewarding
Fresh highrewarding
Coffee Experience
quality coffee
Triple
Totally moments
Varied, exotic
Rich sensory
filtrated
integrated
coffee drinks
Convenient,
consumption
water
system
friendly
experience
Siren
service
e
Po i
logo
Green &
nts–of–Differenc
Earth colors

Competitive
Product Set
Local cafés,
fast -food
restaurants, &
convenience
shops

287

Constructing a Brand Positioning Bull’s-eye

Memo

Consumer
Insight

| CHAPTER 10

Exe
cu

tiona
l

e
al Id
Properties/Visu

ty
nti

media responded enthusiastically to the concept, but consumer interest never materialized.
GO was eventually purchased by AT&T for use in a pen computer venture that folded
in 1994.18
There are also situations in which consumers know a brand’s category membership but may not
be convinced the brand is a valid member of the category. They may be aware that Hewlett-Packard
produces digital cameras, but they may not be certain whether Hewlett-Packard cameras are in the
same class as Sony, Olympus, Kodak, and Nikon. In this instance, HP might find it useful to reinforce
category membership.
Brands are sometimes affiliated with categories in which they do not hold membership. This
approach is one way to highlight a brand’s point-of-difference, providing consumers know the

Consumer
Takeaway
Starbucks
gives me the
richest
possible
sensory
experience
drinking
coffee

288

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

brand’s actual membership. DiGiorno’s frozen pizza has adopted such a positioning
strategy—instead of putting it in the frozen pizza category, the marketers have
positioned it in the delivered pizza category with ads that claim, “It’s Not Delivery,
It’s DiGiorno!”
With this approach, however, it’s important not to be trapped between
categories. Consumers should understand what the brand stands for, and not
just what it’s not. The Konica e-mini M digital camera and MP3 player was marketed as the “four-in-one entertainment solution,” but it suffered from functional
deficiencies in each of its product applications and languished in the marketplace
as a result.19
The typical approach to positioning is to inform consumers of a brand’s membership before stating its point-of-difference. Presumably, consumers need to know what
a product is and what function it serves before deciding whether it is superior to the
brands against which it competes. For new products, initial advertising often concentrates on creating brand awareness, and subsequent advertising attempts to create the
brand image.
DiGiorno has cleverly positioned
itself as a convenient, tasty alternative to home-delivered pizza.

COMMUNICATING CATEGORY MEMBERSHIP There are three main ways to convey a
brand’s category membership:
1. Announcing category benefits. To reassure consumers that a brand will deliver on the fundamental reason for using a category, marketers frequently use benefits to announce category
membership. Thus, industrial tools might claim to have durability, and antacids might announce
their efficacy. A brownie mix might attain membership in the baked desserts category by claiming the benefit of great taste and support this claim by including high-quality ingredients (performance) or by showing users delighting in its consumption (imagery).
2. Comparing to exemplars. Well-known, noteworthy brands in a category can also help a
brand specify its category membership. When Tommy Hilfiger was an unknown, advertising announced his membership as a great U.S. designer by associating him with Geoffrey
Beene, Stanley Blacker, Calvin Klein, and Perry Ellis, who were recognized members of
that category.
3. Relying on the product descriptor. The product descriptor that follows the brand name is often a
concise means of conveying category origin. Ford Motor Co. invested more than $1 billion on a
radical new 2004 model called the X-Trainer, which combined the attributes of an SUV, a minivan, and a station wagon. To communicate its unique position—and to avoid association with its
Explorer and Country Squire models—the vehicle, eventually called Freestyle, was designated a
“sports wagon.”20
COMMUNICATING POPs AND PODs One common difficulty in creating a strong,
competitive brand positioning is that many of the attributes or benefits that make up the points-ofparity and points-of-difference are negatively correlated. For example, it might be difficult to position
a brand as “inexpensive” and at the same time assert that it is “of the highest quality.” ConAgra must
convince consumers that Healthy Choice frozen foods both taste good and are good for you. Consider
these examples of negatively correlated attributes and benefits:

Low price vs. High quality

Powerful vs. Safe

Taste vs. Low calories

Strong vs. Refined

Nutritious vs. Good tasting

Ubiquitous vs. Exclusive

Efficacious vs. Mild

Varied vs. Simple

Moreover, individual attributes and benefits often have positive and negative aspects. For example, consider a long-lived brand such as La-Z-Boy recliners, Burberry outerwear, or the New York
Times. The brand’s heritage could suggest experience, wisdom, and expertise. On the other hand, it
could also imply being old-fashioned and not up-to-date.21

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

289

Unfortunately, consumers typically want to maximize both of the negatively correlated
attributes or benefits. Much of the art and science of marketing is dealing with trade-offs, and
positioning is no different. The best approach clearly is to develop a product or service that
performs well on both dimensions. GORE-TEX was able to overcome the seemingly conflicting
product images of “breathable” and “waterproof ” through technological advances. When indepth and quantitative interviews and focus groups suggested that consumers wanted the
benefits of technology without the hassles, Royal Philips launched its “Sense and Simplicity”
advertising campaign for its Philips brand of electronics, using print, online, and television
advertising.22
Some marketers have adopted other approaches to address attribute or benefit trade-offs:
launching two different marketing campaigns, each one devoted to a different brand attribute or
benefit; linking themselves to any kind of entity (person, place, or thing) that possesses the right
kind of equity as a means to establish an attribute or benefit as a POP or POD; and even attempting to convince consumers that the negative relationship between attributes and benefits, if they
consider it differently, is in fact positive.

Differentiation Strategies

Progressive

To build a strong brand and avoid the commodity trap, marketers must start with the belief that
you can differentiate anything. Competitive advantage is a company’s ability to perform in one or
more ways that competitors cannot or will not match. Michael Porter urged companies to build a
sustainable competitive advantage.23 But few competitive advantages are sustainable. At best, they
may be leverageable. A leverageable advantage is one that a company can use as a springboard to
new advantages, much as Microsoft has leveraged its operating system to Microsoft Office and then
to networking applications. In general, a company that hopes to endure must be in the business of
continuously inventing new advantages.24
For a brand to be effectively positioned, however, customers must see any competitive advantage as a customer advantage. For example, if a company claims its product works faster than
its competitors, it won’t be a customer advantage if customers don’t value speed. Select Comfort
has made a splash in the mattress industry with its Sleep Number beds, which allow consumers
to adjust the support and fit of the mattress for optimal comfort with a simple numbering
index.25 Companies must also focus on building customer advantages.26 Then they will deliver
high customer value and satisfaction, which leads to high repeat purchases and ultimately to
high company profitability.

Progressive Progressive gained a competitive advantage in the mid-1990s

when it became one of the first auto insurance companies to sell direct to consumers via
the Internet. The company’s early adoption of technology enabled it to offer a unique service:
In addition to providing free online quotes for its own policies, Progressive also provided
quotes from up to three competitors, information that until then had been available only
through insurance agents. In addition to saving its customers time, Progressive was able to save them
money by showing that, in many cases, its policies were more competitively priced. Once Progressive

Progressive supports its low-price
point-of-difference by providing
competitive quotes online.

290

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

won new customers’ business, it mobilized an army of 12,000 claims adjusters who will speed right
to an accident scene—and often cut a check right on the spot. It has further enhanced its competitiveness by adding innovative service features such as an “accident concierge,” who handles all
aspects of the claims and repair process for customers, and online policy management that enables
customers to make payments and change coverage any time. These customer advantages made
Progressive the 3rd largest auto insurer in the United States by 2006, up from 48th in 1980, with
12 million customers.27

MEANS OF DIFFERENTIATION The obvious means of differentiation, and often the ones
most compelling to consumers, relate to aspects of the product and service (reviewed in
Chapters 12 and 13). Swatch offers colorful, fashionable watches; GEICO offers reliable
insurance at discount prices. In competitive markets, however, firms may need to go beyond
these. Consider these other dimensions, among the many that a company can use to differentiate
its market offerings:
•

•

•

•

Employee differentiation. Companies can have better-trained employees who provide superior customer service. Singapore Airlines is well regarded in large part because of its flight attendants. The sales forces of such companies as General Electric, Cisco, Frito-Lay,
Northwestern Mutual Life, and Pfizer enjoy an excellent reputation.28
Channel differentiation. Companies can more effectively and efficiently design their distribution channels’ coverage, expertise, and performance to make buying the product easier
and more enjoyable and rewarding. Back in 1946, pet food was cheap, not too nutritious,
and available exclusively in supermarkets and the occasional feed store. Dayton, Ohio–based
Iams found success selling premium pet food through regional veterinarians, breeders, and
pet stores.
Image differentiation. Companies can craft powerful, compelling images that appeal to consumers’ social and psychological needs. The primary explanation for Marlboro’s extraordinary
worldwide market share (around 30 percent) is that its “macho cowboy” image has struck a
responsive chord with much of the cigarette-smoking public. Wine and liquor companies also
work hard to develop distinctive images for their brands. Even a seller’s physical space can be a
powerful image generator. Hyatt Regency hotels developed a distinctive image through its
atrium lobbies.
Services differentiation. A service company can differentiate itself by designing a better
and faster delivery system that provides more effective and efficient solutions to consumers.
There are three levels of differentiation.29 The first is reliability: Some suppliers are more reliable in their on-time delivery, order completeness, and order-cycle time. The second is
resilience: Some suppliers are better at handling emergencies, product recalls, and inquiries.
The third is innovativeness: Some suppliers create better information systems, introduce bar
coding and mixed pallets, and in other ways help the customer.

EMOTIONAL BRANDING Many marketing experts believe a brand positioning should
have both rational and emotional components. In other words, a good positioning should
contain points-of-difference and points-of-parity that appeal both to the head and to
the heart.
To do this, strong brands often seek to build on their performance advantages to strike an emotional chord with their customers. When research on scar-treatment product Mederma found that
women were buying it not just for the physical treatment but also to increase their self-esteem, the
marketers of the brand added emotional messaging to what had traditionally been a practical
message that stressed physician recommendations: “What we have done is supplement the rational
with the emotional.”30
A person’s emotional response to a brand and its marketing will depend on many factors. One
increasingly important factor is a brand’s authenticity. 31 Brands such as Hershey’s, Kraft,
Crayola, Kellogg’s, and Johnson & Johnson that are seen as authentic and genuine can evoke
trust, affection, and strong loyalty.32 Guinness celebrated its heritage, quality, and authenticity
with a 250th anniversary marketing campaign whose ads depict consumers all over the world
toasting the brand.33

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

291

Brand consultant Marc Gobé believes emotional brands share three specific traits:
(1) strong people-focused corporate culture, (2) a distinctive communication style and philosophy, and (3) a compelling emotional hook.34 Saatchi & Saatchi CEO Kevin Roberts advocates
that brands strive to become lovemarks. Brands that are lovemarks, according to Roberts, command both respect and love and result from a brand’s ability to achieve mystery, sensuality,
and intimacy:35
1.

2.
3.

Mystery draws together stories, metaphors, dreams, and symbols. Mystery adds to the complexity of relationships and experiences because people are naturally drawn to what they don’t
know.
Sensuality keeps the five senses of sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste on constant alert for
new textures, intriguing scents and tastes, wonderful music, and other sensory stimuli.
Intimacy means empathy, commitment, and passion. The close connections that win intense
loyalty as well as the small perfect gesture.

By successfully differentiating themselves, emotional brands can also provide financial payoffs. As part of its IPO, the UK mobile phone operator O2 was rebranded from British
Telecom’s struggling BT Cellnet, based on a powerful emotional campaign about freedom and
enablement. When customer acquisition, loyalty, and average revenue soared, the business was
acquired by Spanish multinational Telefonica after only five years for more than three times its
IPO price.36
In general, the firm should monitor three variables when analyzing potential threats posed
by competitors:
1.
2.
3.

Share of market—The competitor’s share of the target market.
Share of mind—The percentage of customers who named the competitor in responding to the
statement, “Name the first company that comes to mind in this industry.”
Share of heart—The percentage of customers who named the competitor in responding to the
statement, “Name the company from which you would prefer to buy the product.”

There’s an interesting relationship among these three measures.
Table 10.3 shows them as
recorded for three hypothetical competitors. Competitor A enjoys the highest market share but is
slipping. Its mind share and heart share are also slipping, probably because it’s not providing good
product availability and technical assistance. Competitor B is steadily gaining market share, probably
due to strategies that are increasing its mind share and heart share. Competitor C seems to be stuck
at a low level of market, mind, and heart share, probably because of its poor product and marketing
attributes. We could generalize as follows: Companies that make steady gains in mind share and heart
share will inevitably make gains in market share and profitability. Firms such as CarMax, Timberland,
Jordan’s Furniture, Wegmans, and Toyota are all reaping the benefits of providing emotional, experiential, social, and financial value to satisfy customers and all their constituents.37

Alternative Approaches to Positioning
The competitive brand positioning model we’ve reviewed in this chapter is a structured way to approach positioning based on in-depth consumer, company, and competitive analysis. Some marketers have proposed other, less-structured approaches in recent years that offer provocative ideas
on how to position a brand. We highlight a few of those here.

TABLE 10.3

Market Share, Mind Share, and Heart Share
Market Share

Mind Share

Heart Share

2011

2012

2013

2011

2012

2013

2011

2012

2013

Competitor A

50%

47%

44%

60%

58%

54%

45%

42%

39%

Competitor B

30

34

37

30

31

35

44

47

53

Competitor C

20

19

19

10

11

11

11

11

8

292

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

BRAND NARRATIVES AND STORYTELLING Rather than outlining specific attributes
or benefits, some marketing experts describe positioning a brand as telling a narrative or story.38
Randall Ringer and Michael Thibodeau see narrative branding as based on deep metaphors that
connect to people’s memories, associations, and stories.39 They identify five elements of narrative
branding: (1) the brand story in terms of words and metaphors, (2) the consumer journey in terms
of how consumers engage with the brand over time and touch points where they come into contact
with it, (3) the visual language or expression for the brand, (4) the manner in which the narrative is
expressed experientially in terms of how the brand engages the senses, and (5) the role/relationship
the brand plays in the lives of consumers. Based on literary convention and brand experience, they
also offer the following framework for a brand story:
•
•
•
•

Setting. The time, place, and context
Cast. The brand as a character, including its role in the life of the audience, its relationships
and responsibilities, and its history or creation myth
Narrative arc. The way the narrative logic unfolds over time, including actions, desired experiences, defining events, and the moment of epiphany
Language. The authenticating voice, metaphors, symbols, themes, and leitmotifs

Patrick Hanlon developed the related concept of “primal branding” that views brands as complex belief systems. According to Hanlon, diverse brands such as Google, MINI Cooper, the U.S.
Marine Corps, Starbucks, Apple, UPS, and Aveda all have a “primal code” or DNA that resonates
with their customers and generates their passion and fervor. He outlines seven assets that make up
this belief system or primal code: a creation story, creed, icon, rituals, sacred words, a way of dealing with nonbelievers, and a good leader.40

BRAND JOURNALISM When he was CMO at McDonald’s, Larry Light advocated an
approach to brand positioning that he called “brand journalism.” Just as editors and writers
for newspapers and magazines tell many facets of a story to capture the interests of diverse
groups of people, Light believes marketers should communicate different messages to
different market segments, as long as they at least broadly fit within the basic broad image of
the brand.41
Brand Journalism is a chronicle of the varied things that happen in our brand world,
throughout our day, throughout the years. Our brand means different things to different people. It does not have one brand position. It is positioned differently in the
minds of kids, teens, young adults, parents and seniors. It is positioned differently at
breakfast, lunch, dinner, snack, weekday, weekend, with kids or on a business trip.
Brand Journalism allows us to be a witness to the multi-faceted aspects of a brand
story. No one communication alone tells the whole brand story. Each communication
provides a different insight into our brand. It all adds up to a McDonald’s journalistic
brand chronicle.

CULTURAL BRANDING Oxford University’s Douglas Holt believes for companies to build
iconic, leadership brands, they must assemble cultural knowledge, strategize according to
cultural branding principles, and hire and train cultural experts.42 Even Procter & Gamble, a
company that has long orchestrated how shoppers perceive its products, has started on what its
chief executive, A.G. Lafley, calls “a learning journey” with the consumer. “Consumers are
beginning in a very real sense to own our brands and participate in their creation,” he said. “We
need to learn to begin to let go.”
The University of Wisconsin’s Craig Thompson view brands as sociocultural
templates, citing research investigating brands as cultural resources that shows how ESPN
Zone restaurants tap into competitive masculinity; and how American Girl dolls tap into
mother-daughter relationships and the cross-generational transfer of femininity. 43 Experts
who see consumers actively cocreating brand meaning and positioning even refer to this as
“Brand Wikification,” given that wikis are written by contributors from all walks of life and
all points of view.44

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

| CHAPTER 10

293

Positioning and Branding
a Small Business
Building brands for a small business is a challenge because these firms have limited resources and budgets. Nevertheless, numerous success stories exist of entrepreneurs
who have built their brands up essentially from scratch to become powerhouse brands.

vitaminwater In 1996, J. Darius Bickoff launched an electrolyteenhanced line of bottled water called smartwater, followed by the introduction
of vitaminwater, a vitamin-enhanced and flavored alternative to plain bottled
water, two years later, and fruitwater two years after that. Clever marketing
including endorsement deals with rapper 50 Cent, singer Kelly Clarkson,
actress Jennifer Aniston, and football star Tom Brady helped to drive success. Less than
10 years after its launch, Bickoff’s Energy Brands company, also known as Glacéau, was
sold to the Coca-Cola company for $4.2 billion in cash.45
In general, with limited resources behind the brand, both focus and consistency in
marketing programs are critically important. Creativity is also paramount—finding
new ways to market new ideas about products to consumers. Some specific branding guidelines for
small businesses are as follows.
•

•

•

•

Creatively conduct low-cost marketing research. There are a variety of low-cost marketing
research methods that help small businesses connect with customers and study competitors.
One way is to set up course projects at local colleges and universities to access the expertise of
both students and professors.
Focus on building one or two strong brands based on one or two key associations. Small
businesses often must rely on only one or two brands and key associations as points of difference for those brands. These associations must be consistently reinforced across the marketing
program and over time. Rooted in the snowboarding and surfing cultures, Volcom has
adopted a “Youth Against Establishment” credo that has resulted in steady sales of its music,
athletic apparel, and jewelry.
Employ a well-integrated set of brand elements. Tactically, it is important for small businesses to maximize the contribution of each of the three main sets of brand equity drivers.
First, they should develop a distinctive, well-integrated set of brand elements that enhances
both brand awareness and brand image. Brand elements should be memorable and meaningful, with as much creative potential as possible. Innovative packaging can substitute for ad
campaigns by capturing attention at the point of purchase.
SMARTFOOD introduced its first product without any advertising by means of both a unique package that served as a strong
visual symbol on the shelf and an extensive sampling program
that encouraged trial. Proper names or family names, which
often characterize small businesses, may provide some distinctiveness but can suffer in terms of pronounceability, meaningfulness, memorability, or other branding considerations. If these
deficiencies are too great, explore alternative brand elements.
Create buzz and a loyal brand community. Because small
businesses often must rely on word of mouth to establish their
positioning, public relations, social networking, and low-cost promotions and sponsorship can be inexpensive alternatives. As discussed in Chapter 9, creating a vibrant brand community among
current and prospective customers can also be a cost-effective way
to reinforce loyalty and help spread the word to new prospects.
Web browser Mozilla Firefox is able to compete with Microsoft’s
Internet Explorer in part because of its dedicated volunteer group

With a unique formulation and
shrewd marketing, vitaminwater
made a splash in the beverage
market.

Some hard-core fans of Mozilla
Firefox carved out a massive logo
for the brand in the fields outside
Portland, Oregon.

294

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

•

of 10,000 programmers who work on its open source coding. Twelve fans of the brand felt so
strongly about it they used two-by-fours and rope to hollow out a 30,000-square-foot impression
of the brand’s logo in an oat field outside Salem, Oregon!46
Leverage as many secondary associations as possible. Secondary associations—any persons,
places, or things with potentially relevant associations—are often a cost-effective, shortcut
means to build brand equity, especially those that help to signal quality or credibility. Cogent,
makers of software that can identify people through fingerprints, draws 12 percent of its
revenues and much brand equity from the fact that the Department of Homeland Security uses
its products to police the U.S. border.47

Unlike major brands that often have more resources at their disposal, small businesses usually do
not have the luxury to make mistakes and must design and implement marketing programs much
more carefully.

Summary
1. To develop an effective positioning, a company must
study competitors as well as actual and potential customers. Marketers need to identify competitors’ strategies, objectives, strengths, and weaknesses.
2. Developing a positioning requires the determination of
a frame of reference—by identifying the target market
and the resulting nature of the competition—and the
optimal points-of-parity and points-of-difference brand
associations.
3. A company’s closest competitors are those seeking to
satisfy the same customers and needs and making similar offers. A company should also pay attention to latent
competitors, who may offer new or other ways to satisfy
the same needs. A company should identify competitors
by using both industry- and market-based analyses.
4. Points-of-difference are those associations unique to the
brand that are also strongly held and favorably evaluated
by consumers. Points-of-parity are those associations
not necessarily unique to the brand but perhaps shared
with other brands. Category point-of-parity associations

are associations consumers view as being necessary to
a legitimate and credible product offering within a certain
category. Competitive point-of-parity associations are
those associations designed to negate competitors’
points-of-difference or overcome perceived weaknesses
or vulnerabilities of the brand.
5. The key to competitive advantage is relevant brand differentiation—consumers must find something unique
and meaningful about a market offering. These differences may be based directly on the product or service
itself or on other considerations related to factors such
as employees, channels, image, or services.
6. Emotional branding is becoming an important way to
connect with customers and create differentiation from
competitors.
7. Although small businesses should adhere to many of
the branding and positioning principles larger companies use, they must place extra emphasis on their brand
elements and secondary associations and must be
more focused and create a buzz for their brand.

Applications
Marketing Debate
What Is the Best Way to Position?

Marketing Discussion
Attributes and Benefits

Marketers have different views of how to position a brand.
Some value structured approaches such as the competitive
positioning model described in the chapter, which focuses
on specific points-of-parity and points-of-difference. Others
prefer unstructured approaches that rely more on stories,
narratives, and other flowing depictions.
Take a position: The best way to position a brand
is through a structured approach versus The best way to
position a brand is through an unstructured approach.

Identify other negatively correlated attributes and benefits
not described in this chapter. What strategies do firms use
to try to position themselves on the basis of pairs of attributes and benefits?

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

Marketing Excellence

>>Louis Vuitton

Louis Vuitton (LV) is one of the world’s most legendary
brands and is synonymous with images of luxury, wealth,
and fashion. The company is known for its iconic handbags, leather goods, shoes, watches, jewelry, accessories, and sunglasses, and is the highest-ranked luxury
brand in the world.
It was 1854 when Louis Vuitton opened his first
store in Paris and sold handmade, high-quality trunks
and luggage. In the late 19th century, Vuitton introduced his signature Damier and Monogram Canvas
materials, featuring the famous design still used in most
of the company’s products today. Throughout the 20th
century, the company that carries his name continued
to grow internationally, expanding into the fashion
world by the 1950s and reaching $10 million in sales by
1977. In 1987, Louis Vuitton merged with Moët et
Chandon and Hennessy, leading manufacturers of
champagne and cognac, and created LVMH, a luxury
goods conglomerate.
Louis Vuitton’s products are made with state-ofthe-art materials, and its designers use a combination
of art, precision, and craftsmanship to produce only the
finest products. The legendary LV monogram appears
on all the company’s products and stands for the highest quality, premium status, and luxury travel. Over the
years, however, counterfeiting has become a huge
problem and one of Louis Vuitton’s most difficult challenges. Louis Vuitton is one of the most counterfeited
brands in the world, and the company takes the

| CHAPTER 10

295

problem very seriously because it feels that counterfeits
dilute its prestigious brand image. Louis Vuitton employs a full team of lawyers and fights counterfeiting in
a variety of ways with special agencies and investigative teams.
Until the 1980s, Louis Vuitton products were available
in a wide variety of department stores. However, to reduce the risk of counterfeiting, the company now maintains tighter control over its distribution channels. Today, it
sells its products only through authentic Louis Vuitton
boutiques located in upscale shopping areas and highend department stores, all run independently with their
own employees and managers. Louis Vuitton prices are
never reduced, and only recently did the company start
selling through louisvuitton.com in hopes of reaching new
consumers and regions.
Over the years, a wide variety of high-profile
celebrities and supermodels have used LV products,
including Madonna, Audrey Hepburn, and Jennifer
Lopez. In its marketing efforts, the company has used
high-fashion celebrities, billboards, print ads, and its
own international regatta—the Louis Vuitton Cup.
Recently, LV broke tradition and featured nontraditional
celebrities such as Steffi Graf, Mikhail Gorbachev, Buzz
Aldrin, and Keith Richards in a campaign entitled “Core
Values.” LV also launched its first television commercial
focused on luxury traveling rather than fashion and has
formed new partnerships with international artists, museums, and cultural organizations in hopes of keeping
the brand fresh. That said, Louis Vuitton still spends up
to 60 hours making one piece of luggage by hand—the
same way it did 150 years ago.
Today, Louis Vuitton holds a brand value of $26
billion according to Forbes and is ranked the 17th most
powerful global brand according to Interbrand. The
company is focused on expanding its luxury brand into
growing markets such as China and India as well as
continuing to grow in strong markets like Japan and
Europe. It also continues to add new product lines to
its portfolio.
Questions
1. How does an exclusive brand such as Louis Vuitton
grow and stay fresh while retaining its cachet?
2. Is the counterfeiting of Louis Vuitton always a negative? Are there any circumstances where it can be
seen as having some positive aspects?
Sources: Reena Jana, “Louis Vuitton’s Life of Luxury,” BusinessWeek, August 6, 2007; Eric
Pfanner, “Luxury Firms Move to Make Web Work for Them,” New York Times, November 17, 2009;
www.louisvuitton.com.

296

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Marketing Excellence

>>American Express

American Express is one of the world’s most respected brands, known globally for its charge cards,
travel services, and financial services. American
Express began as a 19th-century express shipping
company, grew into a travel services company, and
eventually evolved into a global payments company
associated with brand images such as prestige, trust,
security, customer service, international acceptability,
and integrity.
American Express created the first internationally
accepted “Travelers Cheque” in 1891, which used the
same signature security system and exchange rate
guarantees employed today. American Express issued
its first charge card in 1958 but collected a higher annual fee than its competitors to create the feeling of
prestige and membership. A charge card requires that
customers pay off outstanding balances, unlike the revolving debt possible with credit cards. By 1967, onethird of the company’s total profit came from its charge
card businesses, and the American Express card surpassed the Travelers Cheque to become the company’s
most visible symbol.
In the 1960s and 1970s, American Express stepped
up its marketing efforts in response to strong competition
from Master Charge (now MasterCard) and BankAmericard
(later to become Visa). Ad agency Ogilvy & Mather created
the now-famous “Don’t Leave Home Without It” in the early
1970s as a “synergy” tagline. In 1974, the now-familiar
blue-box logo first appeared, with the words American
Express printed in white outline over a square blue
background.
Many perceived American Express cards as a
status symbol signifying success and achievement. The
company called its cardholders “card members” and

printed the year they became members on their cards,
suggesting membership in a club. It maintained this elusive image through its advertising, impeccable customer
service, and elite promotions and events.
During the 1980s, American Express expanded into
a variety of financial categories, including brokerage
services, banking, and insurance, by acquiring a number of companies such as Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb
Inc. and E. F. Hutton & Co. It encountered difficulty integrating these broad financial offerings, however, and it
divested many of its financial holdings in the early
1990s. The new, leaner company focused on its core
competencies: charge and credit cards, Travelers
Cheques, travel services, and select banking and financial services. In addition, American Express increased
the number of merchants that accepted its cards,
adding Walmart, and developed new card offerings, including co-branded cards. To communicate the transformation that had taken place during the 1990s, the
company launched a corporate ad campaign called,
“Do More.”
American Express also responded to Visa and
MasterCard’s increased pressure in the mid-1990s by rebranding its Small Business Services division as “OPEN:
The Small Business Network” and adding benefits such
as flexible payments as well as special offers, partnerships, and resources for small businesses. John Hayes,
chief marketing officer for American Express, explained
the rationale behind developing a separate small business
brand, “Small business owners are fundamentally different
from people who work for large companies. They’re characterized by a shared mindset; they live and breathe the
business they’re in. We think it’s important for this area to
have its own identity.”
At the turn of the century, American Express introduced two revolutionary new credit cards, Blue and
Centurion Black. Blue contained a chip that enhanced
Internet security and targeted younger, tech-savvy consumers with a hip image and no annual fee. The Black
Card, on the other hand, targeted the most elite clients,
who spend more than $150,000 annually and desired
amenities such as a 24-hour personal concierge service
and invitations to exclusive events. The company also
continued to expand its Membership Rewards program,
which at the time was the world’s largest card-based rewards program. This allowed cardholders to redeem
points for travel, entertainment, gift certificates, and other
predetermined offerings.
Visa turned on the pressure by taking ownership of
the latest consumer trend, check cards, which were
debit cards that subtracted money for purchases directly
from a cardholders’ bank account. MasterCard surged in
popularity as well when it created the “Priceless” ad campaign, which became a ubiquitous pop culture reference

CRAFTING THE BRAND POSITIONING

point. However, American Express scored a huge legal
victory against Visa and MasterCard in 2004 when the
Supreme Court ruled that it could pursue relationships
with any and all banks, which technicalities had prevented it from doing before. Over the next three years,
American Express partnered with banks such as MBNA,
Citigroup, UBS, and USAA and increased its card accounts from 60 million in 2003 to 86 million in 2007.
American Express introduced two new marketing
campaigns in the 2000s. The “My Life. My Card” campaign in 2004 featured celebrities like Robert De Niro,
Ellen DeGeneres, and Tiger Woods providing intimate
narratives about places, causes, achievements, and avocations that were meaningful to them. In 2007, American
Express continued to feature celebrities in its ads but
introduced a new tagline—“Are you a Cardmember?”—
that acted as more of a call to action to join American
Express than its previous, more passive campaign.
Things turned for the worse as the global economy
collapsed in 2008 and 2009, significantly dampening
American Express’s financial results. The company’s
stock price fell 64 percent in 2008 caused by numerous
problems, including increased default payments, weaker
billings, and higher credit losses. In addition, many
analysts agreed the company “grew too fast from
2005–2007.” The company had changed its core strategy
of targeting wealthier, low-risk consumers with a prestigious brand and valuable rewards in order to increase its
total number of card members. Its newer products, which
allowed consumers to carry over a balance and pay only
the interest, came back to hurt American Express’s bottom line during the recession.
Despite these disappointing financial results,
BusinessWeek and Interbrand ranked American Express
the fifteenth “Most Valuable Brand in the World” and

| CHAPTER 10

297

Fortune ranked it one of the top 30 “Most Admired
Companies.” This brand value was a testament not only to
the company’s product and marketing innovation but also
to its commitment to providing customers with outstanding service at any location in the world at any time of day.
Today, American Express offers a variety of different personal cards as well as small business and corporate cards,
each with a different level of customer service, fees, rewards, spending limits, and special access or services.
The company’s five most popular cards from 2009 were
the Platinum Card, Preferred Rewards Gold Card,
Starwood Preferred Guest Credit Card, Gold Delta
SkyMiles Credit Card, and Preferred Rewards Green Card.
Questions
1. Evaluate American Express in terms of its competitors. How well is it positioned? How has it changed
over time? In what segments of its business does
American Express face the most competition?
2. Evaluate American Express’s integration of its various
businesses. What recommendations would you make
in order to maximize the contribution to equity of all its
business units? At the same time, is the corporate
brand sufficiently coherent?
3. Discuss the company’s decision to grow beyond its
core affluent consumer base. What did this do for the
company and the brand?
Sources: Hilary Cassidy, “Amex Has Big Plans; For Small Business Unit,” Brandweek, January 21,
2002; American Express, “Ellen DeGeneres, Laird Hamilton, Tiger Woods & Robert De Niro Featured
in New American Express Global Ad Campaign,” November 8, 2004; “The VISA Black Card: A Smart
Strategy in Trying Times,” BusinessPundit.com, December 8, 2008; “World’s Most Admired Companies
2009,” Fortune, August 5, 2009; “Credit Cards: Loyalty and Retention—US—November 2007,”
Mintel Reports, November 2007; Scott Cendrowski, “Is It Time to Buy American Express?” CNN Money,
April 17, 2009; American Express, “Membership Rewards Program from American Express Adds
Practical Rewards for Tough Economic Times,” February 19, 2009.

298

PART 4

ter
p
a
Ch

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

11

In This Chapter, We Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How can market leaders expand the total market and defend
market share?
2. How should market challengers attack market leaders?
3. How can market followers or nichers compete effectively?
4. What marketing strategies are appropriate at each stage of the
product life cycle?
5. How should marketers adjust their strategies and tactics
for an economic downturn or recession?

Through innovative new products and
aggressive advertising, Under Armour
has played the role of a challenger
brand to market leader Nike.

Competitive Dynamics
To be a long-term market leader is the goal of any marketer. Today’s
challenging marketing circumstances, however, often dictate that companies reformulate their
marketing strategies and offerings several times. Economic conditions change, competitors
launch new assaults, and buyer interest and requirements evolve. Different market positions can
suggest different market strategies.

Former University of Maryland football player Kevin Plank was dissatisfied in his playing
days with cotton T-shirts that retained water and became heavy during practice. So with
$500 and several yards of coat lining, he worked with a local tailor to create seven prototypes of snug-fitting T-shirts that absorbed perspiration and kept athletes dry. Under
Armour was born and quickly became a favorite at high schools, colleges, and universities. Intense, in-your-face advertising featuring NFL player “Big E” Eric Ogbogu grunting and screaming, “We must protect this house,” sent a loud message to target teens and young adult males that a
new brand of athletic clothing and gear had arrived. With a focus on performance and authenticity, Under Armour later introduced football cleats to cover
players literally from head to foot. The introduction of a full line of running This chapter examines the role competition
shoes in 2009, however, put them squarely into competition with formidable plays and how marketers can best manage their brands
depending on their market position and stage of the
opponents Nike and adidas. The launch also reflected an attempt to move
product life cycle. Competition grows more intense every
away some from team sports to attract individual consumers and, in particuyear—from global competitors eager to grow sales in
lar, reach a new demographic—women. An ad campaign themed “Athletes
new markets, from online competitors seeking costRun” introduced the technologically advanced, high-end Apparition and efficient ways to expand distribution, from private-label
Revenant running shoes showing many accomplished athletes who were not and store brands providing low-price alternatives, and
well-known as runners running in the shoes. The next new product initiative from brand extensions by mega-brands moving into new
under consideration—basketball shoes—would capitalize on one of their categories.2 For these reasons and more, product and
athletic endorsers, up-and-coming NBA player Brandon Jennings, but would brand fortunes change over time, and marketers must
also represent an even more full-on, direct assault of some of Nike’s and adi- respond accordingly.
das’s market turf.1

Competitive Strategies
for Market Leaders
Suppose a market is occupied by the firms shown in
Figure 11.1. Forty percent is in the hands
of a market leader; another 30 percent belongs to a market challenger; and 20 percent is claimed by
a market follower willing to maintain its share and not rock the boat. Market nichers, serving small
segments larger firms don’t reach, hold the remaining 10 percent.
A market leader has the largest market share and usually leads in price changes, new-product introductions, distribution coverage, and promotional intensity. Some historical market leaders are
Microsoft (computer software), Gatorade (sports drinks), Best Buy (retail electronics), McDonald’s
(fast food), Blue Cross Blue Shield (health insurance), and Visa (credit cards).
299

PART 4

40%

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Market
leader

30%

Market
challenger

20%

Market
follower

10%

Market
nichers

|Fig. 11.1|

Hypothetical Market
Structure

Although marketers assume well-known brands are distinctive in consumers’ minds, unless a
dominant firm enjoys a legal monopoly, it must maintain constant vigilance. A powerful product
innovation may come along; a competitor might find a fresh marketing angle or commit to a major marketing investment; or the leader’s cost structure might spiral upward. One well-known
brand and market leader that has worked to stay on top is Xerox.

Xerox

300

Xerox Xerox has had to become more than just a copier company. Now the blue-chip

icon with the name that became a verb sports the broadest array of imaging products in the
world and dominates the market for high-end printing systems. And it’s making a huge product
line transition as it moves from the old light lens technology to digital systems. Xerox is
preparing for a world in which most pages are printed in color (which, not incidentally, generates five times the revenue of black-and-white). Besides revamping its machines, Xerox is beefing up sales
by providing annuity-like products and services that are ordered again and again: document management,
ink, and toners. It has even introduced the managed print-services business to help companies actually
eliminate desktop printers and let employees share multifunction devices that copy, print, and fax. Once
slow to respond to the emergence of Canon and the small-copier market, Xerox is doing everything it can
to stay ahead of the game.3
In many industries, a discount competitor has undercut the leader’s prices. “Marketing Insight:
When Your Competitor Delivers More for Less” describes how leaders can respond to an aggressive
competitive price discounter.

Marketing Insight
When Your Competitor Delivers
More for Less
Companies offering the powerful combination of low prices and high
quality are capturing the hearts and wallets of consumers all over the
world. In the United States, more than half the population now shops
weekly at mass merchants such as Walmart and Target. In the United
Kingdom, premium retailers such as Boots and Sainsbury are scrambling to meet intensifying price—and quality—competition from ASDA
and Tesco.
These and similar value players, such as Aldi, Dell, E*TRADE
Financial, JetBlue Airways, Ryanair, and Southwest Airlines, are
transforming the way consumers of nearly every age and income
level purchase groceries, apparel, airline tickets, financial services,
and computers. Traditional players are right to feel threatened.
Upstart firms often rely on serving one or a few consumer segments,
providing better delivery or just one additional benefit, and matching
low prices with highly efficient operations to keep costs down. They

have changed consumer expectations about the trade-off between
quality and price.
To compete, mainstream companies need to infuse their timeless strategies like cost control and product differentiation with
greater intensity and focus, and then execute them flawlessly.
Differentiation, for example, becomes less about the abstract goal of
rising above competitive clutter and more about identifying openings
left by the value players’ business models. Effective pricing means
waging a transaction-by-transaction perception battle for consumers predisposed to believe value-oriented competitors are
always cheaper.
Competitive outcomes will be determined, as always, on the
ground—in product aisles, merchandising displays, reconfigured
processes, and pricing stickers. Traditional players can’t afford to drop
a stitch. The new competitive environment places a new premium
on—and adds new twists to—the old imperatives of differentiation
and execution.
Differentiation

Marketers need to protect areas where their business models give
other companies room to maneuver. Instead of trying to compete with
Walmart and other value retailers on price, for example, Walgreens
emphasizes convenience. It has expanded rapidly to make its stores
ubiquitous, mostly on corners with easy parking, and overhauled store
layouts to speed consumers in and out, placing key categories such as
convenience foods and one-hour photo services near the front. To
simplify prescription orders, the company has installed a telephone and

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

online ordering system and drive-through windows at most freestanding stores. These steps helped it increase its revenue from $15 billion
in 1998 to over $59 billion in 2008, making it the largest U.S.
drugstore chain.
Execution

Kmart’s disastrous experience trying to compete head-on with Walmart
on price highlights the difficulty of challenging value leaders on their
own terms. To compete effectively, firms may instead need to downplay
or even abandon some market segments. To compete with Ryanair and
easyJet, British Airways has put more emphasis on its long-haul routes,
where value-based players are not active, and less on the short-haul
routes where they thrive.
Major airlines have also introduced their own low-cost carriers.
But Continental’s Lite, KLM’s Buzz, SAS’s Snowflake, and United’s

| CHAPTER 11

301

Shuttle have all been unsuccessful. One school of thought is that
companies should set up low-cost operations only if: (1) their existing
businesses will become more competitive as a result and (2) the new
business will derive some advantages it would not have gained if independent. Low-cost operations set up by HSBC, ING, Merrill Lynch, and
Royal Bank of Scotland—First Direct, ING Direct, ML Direct, and Direct
Line Insurance, respectively—succeed in part thanks to synergies between the old and new lines of business. The low-cost operation must
be designed and launched as a moneymaker in its own right, not just
as a defensive play.
Sources: Adapted from Nirmalya Kumar, “Strategies to Fight Low-Cost Rivals,”
Harvard Business Review, December 2006, pp. 104–12; Robert J. Frank, Jeffrey P.
George, and Laxman Narasimhan, “When Your Competitor Delivers More for Less,”
McKinsey Quarterly (Winter 2004): 48–59. See also Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp
and Nirmalya Kumar, “Don’t Be Undersold,” Harvard Business Review, December
2009, pp. 90–95.

To stay number one, the firm must first find ways to expand total market demand. Second, it
must protect its current share through good defensive and offensive actions. Third, it should increase market share, even if market size remains constant. Let’s look at each strategy.

Expanding Total Market Demand
When the total market expands, the dominant firm usually gains the most. If Heinz can convince
more people to use ketchup, or to use ketchup with more meals, or to use more ketchup on each occasion, the firm will benefit considerably because it already sells almost two-thirds of the country’s
ketchup. In general, the market leader should look for new customers or more usage from existing
customers.

NEW CUSTOMERS Every product class has the potential to attract buyers who are unaware of
the product or are resisting it because of price or lack of certain features. As Chapter 2 suggested, a
company can search for new users among three groups: those who might use it but do not (marketpenetration strategy), those who have never used it (new-market segment strategy), or those who live
elsewhere (geographical-expansion strategy).
Here is how Starbucks describes its multipronged approach to growth on its corporate Web site.4
Starbucks purchases and roasts high-quality whole bean coffees and sells them
along with fresh, rich-brewed, Italian style espresso beverages, a variety of pastries and confections, and coffee-related accessories and equipment—primarily
through its company-operated retail stores. In addition to sales through our
company-operated retail stores, Starbucks sells whole bean coffees through a
specialty sales group and supermarkets. Additionally, Starbucks produces and
sells bottled Frappuccino® coffee drinks and a line of premium ice creams
through its joint venture partnerships and offers a line of innovative premium
teas produced by its wholly owned subsidiary, Tazo Tea Company. The
Company’s objective is to establish Starbucks as the most recognized and respected brand in the world.

MORE USAGE Marketers can try to increase the amount, level, or frequency of
consumption. They can sometimes boost the amount through packaging or product
redesign. Larger package sizes increase the amount of product consumers use at one
time.5 Consumers use more of impulse products such as soft drinks and snacks when
the product is made more available.

Frappuccino coffee drinks have
been a new source of growth and
revenues for Starbucks.

302

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Increasing frequency of consumption, on the other hand, requires either (1) identifying additional opportunities to use the brand in the same basic way or (2) identifying completely new and
different ways to use the brand.

Additional Opportunities to Use the Brand A marketing program can communicate the
appropriateness and advantages of using the brand. Clorox ads stress the many benefits of its
bleach, such as that it eliminates kitchen odors.
Another opportunity arises when consumers’ perceptions of their usage differs from reality.
Consumers may fail to replace a short-lived product when they should because they overestimate
how long it stays fresh.6 One strategy is to tie the act of replacing the product to a holiday, event, or
time of year. Another might be to provide consumers with better information about when they first
used the product or need to replace it, or (2) the current level of product performance. Gillette razor cartridges feature colored stripes that slowly fade with repeated use, signaling the user to move
on to the next cartridge.
New Ways to Use the Brand The second approach to increasing frequency of consumption is
to identify completely new and different applications. Food product companies have long
advertised recipes that use their branded products in different ways. After discovering that some
consumers used Arm & Hammer baking soda as a refrigerator deodorant, the company launched a
heavy promotion campaign focusing on this use and succeeded in getting half the homes in the
United States to adopt it. Next, the company expanded the brand into a variety of new product
categories such as toothpaste, antiperspirant, and laundry detergent.

Protecting Market Share
While trying to expand total market size, the dominant firm must actively defend its current business:
Boeing against Airbus, Staples against Office Depot, and Google against Yahoo! and Microsoft.7 How
can the leader do so? The most constructive response is continuous innovation. The front-runner
should lead the industry in developing new products and customer services, distribution effectiveness,
and cost cutting. Comprehensive solutions increase its competitive strength and value to customers.

Arm & Hammer has expanded its
classic baking soda product line to
encompass many new products
and uses.

PROACTIVE MARKETING In satisfying customer needs, we can draw a distinction between
responsive marketing, anticipative marketing, and creative marketing. A responsive marketer finds a
stated need and fills it. An anticipative marketer looks ahead to needs customers may have in the
near future. A creative marketer discovers solutions customers did not ask for but to which they
enthusiastically respond. Creative marketers are proactive market-driving firms, not just marketdriven ones.8
Many companies assume their job is just to adapt to customer needs. They are reactive mostly
because they are overly faithful to the customer-orientation paradigm and fall victim to the
“tyranny of the served market.” Successful companies instead proactively shape the
market to their own interests. Instead of trying to be the best player, they change
the rules of the game.9
A company needs two proactive skills: (1) responsive anticipation to see the writing
on the wall, as when IBM changed from a hardware producer to a service business and
(2) creative anticipation to devise innovative solutions, as when PepsiCo introduced
H2OH! (a soft drink–bottled water hybrid). Note that responsive anticipation is performed before a given change, while reactive response happens after the change takes place.
Proactive companies create new offers to serve unmet— and maybe even unknown—
consumer needs. In the late 1970s, Akio Morita, the Sony founder, was working on a pet
project that would revolutionize the way people listened to music: a portable cassette
player he called the Walkman. Engineers at the company insisted there was little demand
for such a product, but Morita refused to part with his vision. By the 20th anniversary of
the Walkman, Sony had sold over 250 million in nearly 100 different models.10
Proactive companies may redesign relationships within an industry, like Toyota
and its relationship to its suppliers. Or they may educate customers, as Body Shop
does in stimulating the choice of environmental-friendly products.
Companies need to practice “uncertainty management.” Proactive firms:
•
•

Are ready to take risks and make mistakes,
Have a vision of the future and of investing in it,

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

•
•
•

| CHAPTER 11

303

Have the capabilities to innovate,
Are flexible and nonbureaucratic, and
Have many managers who think proactively.
Companies that are too risk-averse won’t be winners.

DEFENSIVE MARKETING Even when it does not launch offensives, the market leader must
not leave any major flanks exposed. The aim of defensive strategy is to reduce the probability of
attack, divert attacks to less-threatened areas, and lessen their intensity. Speed of response can make
an important difference to profit. A dominant firm can use the six defense strategies summarized in
Figure 11.2.11
•

•

•

•

•

Position Defense. Position defense means occupying the most desirable market space in consumers’ minds, making the brand almost impregnable, as Procter & Gamble has done with
Tide detergent for cleaning, Crest toothpaste for cavity prevention, and Pampers diapers
for dryness.
Flank Defense. The market leader should erect outposts to protect a weak front or support a
possible counterattack. Procter & Gamble brands such as Gain and Cheer laundry detergent
and Luvs diapers have played strategic offensive and defensive roles.
Preemptive Defense. A more aggressive maneuver is to attack first, perhaps with guerrilla action across the market—hitting one competitor here, another there—and keeping everyone
off balance. Another is to achieve broad market envelopment that signals competitors not to
attack.12 Bank of America’s 18,500 ATMs and 6,100 retail branches nationwide provide steep
competition to local and regional banks. Yet another preemptive defense is to introduce a
stream of new products and announce them in advance.13 Such “preannouncements” can
signal competitors that they will need to fight to gain market share.14 If Microsoft announces
plans for a new-product development, smaller firms may choose to concentrate their development efforts in other directions to avoid head-to-head competition. Some high-tech firms
have been accused of selling “vaporware”—announcing products that miss delivery dates or
are never introduced.15
Counteroffensive Defense. In a counteroffensive, the market leader can meet the attacker
frontally and hit its flank, or launch a pincer movement so it will have to pull back to defend itself. After FedEx watched UPS successfully invade its airborne delivery system, it invested
heavily in ground delivery through a series of acquisitions to challenge UPS on its home turf.16
Another common form of counteroffensive is the exercise of economic or political clout. The
leader may try to crush a competitor by subsidizing lower prices for the vulnerable product
with revenue from its more profitable products, or it may prematurely announce a product
upgrade to prevent customers from buying the competitor’s product. Or the leader may lobby
legislators to take political action to inhibit the competition.
Mobile Defense. In mobile defense, the leader stretches its domain over new territories
through market broadening and market diversification. Market broadening shifts the company’s focus from the current product to the underlying generic need. Thus, “petroleum”
companies such as BP sought to recast themselves as “energy” companies. This change
required them to research the oil, coal, nuclear, hydroelectric, and chemical industries.

(3) Preemptive
ATTACKER

(2) Flank

|Fig. 11.2|

(1)
Position

Six Types of Defense
Strategies

(4) Counteroffensive

(6) Contraction

DEFENDER

(5)
Mobile

304

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

By introducing ground delivery,
FedEx challenged UPS on its
home turf.

•

Market diversification shifts the company’s focus into unrelated industries. When U.S.
tobacco companies such as Reynolds and Philip Morris acknowledged the growing curbs
on cigarette smoking, instead of defending their market position or looking for cigarette
substitutes, they moved quickly into new industries such as beer, liquor, soft drinks, and
frozen foods.
Contraction Defense. Sometimes large companies can no longer defend all their territory. In
planned contraction (also called strategic withdrawal), they give up weaker markets and reassign resources to stronger ones. Since 2006, Sara Lee has spun off products that accounted for
a large percentage of its revenues—including its strong Hanes hosiery brand and global body
care and European detergents businesses—to focus on its core food business.17

Increasing Market Share
No wonder competition has turned fierce in so many markets: one share point can be worth tens of
millions of dollars. Gaining increased share does not automatically produce higher profits, however—
especially for labor-intensive service companies that may not experience many economies of scale.
Much depends on the company’s strategy.18
Because the cost of buying higher market share through acquisition may far exceed its revenue
value, a company should consider four factors first:
•

Profitability

Optimal Market Share

•

0

25 50
75 100
Market Share (%)

|Fig. 11.3|

The Concept of
Optimal Market Share

•

The possibility of provoking antitrust action. Frustrated competitors are likely to cry
“monopoly” and seek legal action if a dominant firm makes further inroads. Microsoft
and Intel have had to fend off numerous lawsuits and legal challenges around the world
as a result of what some feel are inappropriate or illegal business practices and abuse of
market power.
Economic cost.
Figure 11.3 shows that profitability might fall with market share gains
after some level. In the illustration, the firm’s optimal market share is 50 percent. The cost
of gaining further market share might exceed the value if holdout customers dislike the
company, are loyal to competitors, have unique needs, or prefer dealing with smaller firms.
And the costs of legal work, public relations, and lobbying rise with market share. Pushing
for higher share is less justifiable when there are unattractive market segments, buyers who
want multiple sources of supply, high exit barriers, and few scale or experience economies.
Some market leaders have even increased profitability by selectively decreasing market
share in weaker areas.19
The danger of pursuing the wrong marketing activities. Companies successfully gaining
share typically outperform competitors in three areas: new-product activity, relative product

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

•

quality, and marketing expenditures.20 Companies that attempt to increase market share by
cutting prices more deeply than competitors typically don’t achieve significant gains, because
rivals meet the price cuts or offer other values so buyers don’t switch.
The effect of increased market share on actual and perceived quality.21 Too many customers can put a strain on the firm’s resources, hurting product value and service delivery.
Charlotte-based FairPoint Communications struggled to integrate the 1.3 million
customers it gained in buying Verizon Communications’s New England franchise. A slow
conversion and significant service problems led to customer dissatisfaction, regulator’s
anger, and eventually bankruptcy.22

Other Competitive Strategies
Firms that occupy second, third, and lower ranks in an industry are often called runner-up or trailing
firms. Some, such as PepsiCo, Ford, and Avis, are quite large in their own right. These firms can adopt
one of two postures. They can attack the leader and other competitors in an aggressive bid for further
market share as market challengers, or they can choose to not “rock the boat” as market followers.

Market-Challenger Strategies

SoBe

Many market challengers have gained ground or even overtaken the leader. Toyota today produces
more cars than General Motors, Lowe’s is putting pressure on Home Depot, and AMD has been chipping away at Intel’s market share.23 A successful challenger brand in the beverage business is SoBe.

SoBe One of the most competitive aisles in any supermarket, grocery store, or

convenience store is the beverage aisle. SoBe’s successful launch in 1996 was a result of
shrewd planning and creative execution. Positioning against the established Snapple and
Arizona brands, founder John Bello wanted to create a smart fruit juice and iced tea alternative that was fun and innovative and offered added value. The first successful product
was SoBe Black Tea 3G with ginseng, guarana, and ginkgo. The lizard character on the packaging,
from an iconic South Beach hotel, became an integral part of SoBe’s brand imagery. SoBe’s explosive
growth was based on a combination of functional benefits (the 3 Gs), colorful packaging, a powerful
sales force establishing strong shelf presence in the store, and a steady stream of new products.
The slogan “SoBe Yourself” captured the brand’s challenger ethos and supported its nontraditional,
guerilla marketing appeals. SoBe Love Buses created product sampling opportunities, and sponsorship of iconoclastic athletes like skier Bode Miller and golfer John Daly created buzz. SoBe was
purchased by PepsiCo in January 2001 and now offers exotic teas, fruit juices and blends, elixirs,
vitamin- and antioxidant-enhanced water (Lifewater), and sports drinks. Its name is also licensed for
gum and chocolate.24
Challengers set high aspirations while market leaders can fall prey to running business as usual.
Now let’s examine the competitive attack strategies available to challengers.25

DEFINING THE STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE AND OPPONENT(S) A market challenger
must first define its strategic objective, usually to increase market share. The challenger must decide
whom to attack:
•

It can attack the market leader. This is a high-risk but potentially high-payoff strategy and
makes good sense if the leader is not serving the market well. Xerox wrested the copy market
from 3M by developing a better copying process. Later, Canon grabbed a large chunk of
Xerox’s market by introducing desk copiers. This strategy often has the added benefit of distancing the firm from other challengers. When Miller Lite attacked Bud Light on product
quality during the mid 2000s, Coors Light was left out of the conversation.

| CHAPTER 11

305

306

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

•
•

It can attack firms its own size that are not doing the job and are underfinanced. These firms
have aging products, are charging excessive prices, or are not satisfying customers in other ways.
It can attack small local and regional firms. Several major banks grew to their present size by
gobbling up smaller regional banks, or “guppies.”

CHOOSING A GENERAL ATTACK STRATEGY Given clear opponents and objectives,
what attack options are available? We can distinguish five: frontal, flank, encirclement, bypass, and
guerilla attacks.
•

•

•
Combining comfort with rugged
wear, Ariat is taking on the market leaders in the cowboy boot
market.

Frontal Attack. In a pure frontal attack, the attacker matches its opponent’s product, advertising, price, and distribution. The principle of force says the side with the greater resources will
win. A modified frontal attack, such as cutting price, can work if the market leader doesn’t retaliate, and if the competitor convinces the market its product is equal to the leader’s. Helene
Curtis is a master at convincing the market that its brands—such as Suave and Finesse—are
equal in quality but a better value than higher-priced brands.
Flank Attack. A flanking strategy is another name for identifying shifts that are causing gaps to
develop, then rushing to fill the gaps. Flanking is particularly attractive to a challenger with fewer
resources and can be more likely to succeed than frontal attacks. In a geographic attack, the challenger spots areas where the opponent is underperforming. Although the Internet has siphoned
newspaper readers and advertisers away in many markets, Independent News & Media, a
102-year-old Irish media company, sells a majority of its 175 newspaper and magazine titles
where the economy is strong but the Internet is still relatively weak—countries such as Ireland,
South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and India.26 The other flanking strategy is to serve uncovered market needs. Ariat’s cowboy boots have challenged long-time market leaders Justin Boots
and Tony Lama by making boots that were every bit as ranch-ready, but ergonomically designed
to feel as comfortable as a running shoe—a totally new benefit in the category.27
Encirclement Attack. Encirclement attempts to capture a wide slice of territory by launching a
grand offensive on several fronts. It makes sense when the challenger commands superior resources. In making a stand against archrival Microsoft, Sun Microsystems licensed its Java software to hundreds of companies and thousands of software developers for all sorts of consumer
devices. As consumer electronics products began to go digital, Java started
appearing in a wide range of gadgets.
•
Bypass Attack. Bypassing the enemy altogether to attack easier markets
instead offers three lines of approach: diversifying into unrelated products, diversifying into new geographical markets, and leapfrogging
into new technologies. Pepsi has used a bypass strategy against Coke by
(1) rolling out Aquafina bottled water nationally in 1997 before Coke
launched its Dasani brand; (2) purchasing orange juice giant Tropicana
in 1998, when it owned almost twice the market share of Coca-Cola’s
Minute Maid; and (3) purchasing the Quaker Oats Company, owner of
market leader Gatorade sports drink, for $14 billion in 2000.28 In
technological leapfrogging, the challenger patiently researches and develops the next technology, shifting the battleground to its own territory
where it has an advantage. Google used technological leapfrogging to
overtake Yahoo! and become the market leader in search.
•
Guerrilla Attacks. Guerrilla attacks consist of small, intermittent attacks,
conventional and unconventional, including selective price cuts, intense
promotional blitzes, and occasional legal action, to harass the opponent
and eventually secure permanent footholds. A guerrilla campaign can be
expensive, although less so than a frontal, encirclement, or flank attack,
but it typically must be backed by a stronger attack to beat the opponent.

CHOOSING A SPECIFIC ATTACK STRATEGY Any aspect of the
marketing program can serve as the basis for attack, such as lower-priced or
discounted products, new or improved products and services, a wider
variety of offerings, and innovative distribution strategies. A challenger’s
success depends on combining several, more specific, strategies to improve
its position over time.

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

| CHAPTER 11

307

Market-Follower Strategies

S&S Cycle

Theodore Levitt argues that a strategy of product imitation might be
as profitable as a strategy of product innovation.29 In “innovative imitation,” as he calls it, the innovator bears the expense of developing
the new product, getting it into distribution, and informing and educating the market. The reward for all this work and risk is normally
market leadership. However, another firm can come along and copy
or improve on the new product. Although it probably will not overtake the leader, the follower can achieve high profits because it did
not bear any of the innovation expense.

S&S Cycle S&S Cycle is the biggest supplier of

complete engines and major motor parts to more than
15 companies that build several thousand Harley-like cruiser
bikes each year. These cloners charge as much as $30,000 for their customized creations.
S&S has built its name by improving on Harley-Davidson’s handiwork. Its customers are often
would-be Harley buyers frustrated by long waiting lines at the dealer. Others simply want S&S’s incredibly
powerful engines. S&S stays abreast of its evolving market by ordering a new Harley bike every year and
taking apart the engine to see what it can improve upon.30
Many companies prefer to follow rather than challenge the market leader. Patterns of “conscious parallelism” are common in capital-intensive, homogeneous-product industries such as
steel, fertilizers, and chemicals. The opportunities for product differentiation and image differentiation are low, service quality is comparable, and price sensitivity runs high. The mood in
these industries is against short-run grabs for market share, because that only provokes retaliation. Instead, most firms present similar offers to buyers, usually by copying the leader. Market
shares show high stability.
That’s not to say market followers lack strategies. They must know how to hold current customers and win a fair share of new ones. Each follower tries to bring distinctive advantages to its
target market—location, services, financing–while defensively keeping its manufacturing costs low
and its product quality and services high. It must also enter new markets as they open up. The follower must define a growth path, but one that doesn’t invite competitive retaliation. We distinguish
four broad strategies:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Counterfeiter—The counterfeiter duplicates the leader’s product and packages and sells it on
the black market or through disreputable dealers. Music firms, Apple, and Rolex have been
plagued by the counterfeiter problem, especially in Asia.
Cloner—The cloner emulates the leader’s products, name, and packaging, with slight variations. For example, Ralcorp Holdings sells imitations of name-brand cereals in look-alike
boxes. Its Tasteeos, Fruit Rings, and Corn Flakes sell for nearly $1 a box less than the leading
name brands; the company’s sales were up 28 percent in 2008.
Imitator—The imitator copies some things from the leader but differentiates on packaging,
advertising, pricing, or location. The leader doesn’t mind as long as the imitator doesn’t attack
aggressively. Fernandez Pujals grew up in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and took Domino’s home
delivery idea to Spain, where he borrowed $80,000 to open his first store in Madrid. His
Telepizza chain now operates almost 1,050 stores in Europe and Latin America.
Adapter—The adapter takes the leader’s products and adapts or improves them. The adapter
may choose to sell to different markets, but often it grows into a future challenger, as many
Japanese firms have done after improving products developed elsewhere.

What does a follower earn? Normally, less than the leader. A study of food-processing companies
showed the largest averaging a 16 percent return on investment, the number two firm, 6 percent, the
number three firm, –1 percent, and the number four firm, –6 percent. No wonder Jack Welch,
former CEO of GE, told his business units that each must reach the number one or two position in
its market or else! Followership is often not a rewarding path.

Pepsi has used a bypass approach
to battle Coke by finding new markets to enter.

308

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Telepizza adapted Domino’s pizza
delivery concept to Spain with
much success.

Market-Nicher Strategies
An alternative to being a follower in a large market is to be a leader in a small market, or niche, as
we introduced in Chapter 8. Smaller firms normally avoid competing with larger firms by targeting
small markets of little or no interest to the larger firms. But even large, profitable firms may choose
to use niching strategies for some of their business units or companies.

ITW Illinois Tool Works (ITW) manufactures thousands of products, including nails,
ITW

screws, plastic six-pack holders for soda cans, bicycle helmets, backpacks, plastic buckles for
pet collars, resealable food packages, and more. Since the late 1980s, the company has made
between 30 and 40 acquisitions each year that added new products to the product line. ITW has
more than 875 highly autonomous and decentralized business units in 54 countries employing
65,000 people. When one division commercializes a new product, the company spins the product and people
off into a new entity. Despite tough economic times, ITW experienced an increase in revenue in 2008.31
Firms with low shares of the total market can become highly profitable through smart niching.
Such companies tend to offer high value, charge a premium price, achieve lower manufacturing
costs, and shape a strong corporate culture and vision. Family-run Tire Rack sells 2 million specialty
tires a year through the Internet, telephone, and mail from its South Bend, Indiana, location.32
Houston-based VAALCO Energy decided that its odds of striking it rich were better in foreign territory than at home where it faced hundreds of wildcatters. Drilling in an oil field off the coast of
Gabon in West Central Africa, it has met with a lot less competition and a lot more revenue.33
Return on investment for businesses in smaller markets exceeds that in larger markets on average.34
Why is niching so profitable? The market nicher knows the target customers so well, it meets their
needs better than other firms selling to them casually. As a result, the nicher can charge a substantial
price over costs. The nicher achieves high margin, whereas the mass marketer achieves high volume.
Nichers have three tasks: creating niches, expanding niches, and protecting niches. The risk is
that the niche might dry up or be attacked. The company is then stuck with highly specialized
resources that may not have high-value alternative uses.

Zippo

With smoking on a steady decline, Bradford, Pennsylvania–based Zippo
Manufacturing is finding the market for its iconic metal cigarette lighter drying up. Its marketers
need to diversify and broaden their focus to “selling flame.” Although its goal of reducing reliance on tobacco-related products to 50 percent of revenue by 2010 was sidetracked by the

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

| CHAPTER 11

309

recession, the company is determined to broaden its brand meaning to encompass “all flame-related products.” It introduced a long, slender multipurpose lighter for candles, grills, and fireplaces in 2001; acquired W.R.
Case & Sons Cutlery, a knife maker, and DDM Italia, known throughout
Europe for its fine Italian leather goods; and plans to sell a line of outdoor
products in outlets such as Dicks, REI, and True Value.35
Because niches can weaken, the firm must continually create new
ones. “Marketing Memo: Niche Specialist Roles” outlines some options.
The firm should “stick to its niching”but not necessarily to its niche. That
is why multiple niching can be preferable to single niching. With strength
in two or more niches, the company increases its chances for survival.
Firms entering a market should initially aim at a niche rather
than the whole market. The cell phone industry has experienced
phenomenal growth but is now facing fierce competition as the
number of new potential users dwindles. An Irish upstart company,
Digicel Group, has successfully tapped into one of the few remaining high-growth segments: poor people without cell phones.

Digicel Group In 2001, Digicel CEO Denis
O’Brien heard that the government of Jamaica was opening its
local phone market, long monopolized by British telecom giant
Cable & Wireless. O’Brien spent nearly $50 million for a license, using money from the sale of his first telecom venture,
Esat Telecom Group PLC. O’Brien took the plunge because he knew
Jamaicans had to wait over two years for a landline, and only 4 percent of
the population had cell phones. Within 100 days, Digicel had signed on
100,000 subscribers, luring them with inexpensive rates and phones and

Zippo has expanded its brand
meaning to encompass “all flamerelated products” to ensure its
long-term growth prospects.

marketing

Memo

Niche Specialist Roles

The key idea in successful nichemanship is specialization. Here are some
possible niche roles:

• End-user specialist. The firm specializes in one type of end-use customer. For example, a value-added reseller (VAR) customizes computer
hardware and software for specific customer segments and earns a
price premium in the process.

• Vertical-level specialist. The firm specializes at some vertical level
of the production-distribution value chain. A copper firm may concentrate on producing raw copper, copper components, or finished copper
products.

• Customer-size specialist. The firm concentrates on either small,

• Product or product line specialist. The firm carries or produces only
one product line or product. A manufacturer may produce only lenses for
microscopes. A retailer may carry only ties.

• Product-feature specialist. The firm specializes in producing a certain
type of product or product feature. Zipcar’s car-sharing services target
people who live and work in seven major U.S. cities, frequently use public transportation, but still need a car a few times a month.

• Job-shop specialist. The firm customizes its products for individual
customers.

• Quality-price specialist. The firm operates at the low- or highquality ends of the market. Sharp AQUOS specializes in the high-quality,
high-price LCD television and component screen market.

medium-sized, or large customers. Many nichers serve small customers
neglected by the majors.

• Service specialist. The firm offers one or more services not available

• Specific-customer specialist. The firm limits its selling to one or a few

from other firms. A bank might take loan requests over the phone and
hand-deliver the money to the customer.

customers. Many firms sell their entire output to a single company, such
as Walmart or General Motors.

• Channel specialist. The firm specializes in serving only one channel

• Geographic specialist. The firm sells only in a certain locality, region,

of distribution. For example, a soft drink company makes a very largesized serving available only at gas stations.

or area of the world.

310

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

improved service. After eight years, Digicel has more than 8 million customers across its Caribbean and Central American markets, earning a reputation for competitive rates, comprehensive coverage, superior customer
care, and a wide variety of products and services. Digicel has also moved
into the Pacific in Fiji, Samoa, Papua New Guinea, and other markets. Back
in Jamaica, it has become an active sponsor of sports and supporter of
causes, befitting for its ascendance as a market leader in the region.36

Product Life-Cycle
Marketing Strategies
A company’s positioning and differentiation strategy must change as
the product, market, and competitors change over the product life cycle (PLC). To say a product has a life cycle is to assert four things:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Products have a limited life.
Product sales pass through distinct stages, each posing different
challenges, opportunities, and problems to the seller.
Profits rise and fall at different stages of the product life cycle.
Products require different marketing, financial, manufacturing,
purchasing, and human resource strategies in each life-cycle stage.

Product Life Cycles
Digicel has captured a large
segment of the mobile market
in the Caribbean, using Jamaican
world-record sprinter Usain Bolt
as a spokesperson.

Most product life-cycle curves are portrayed as bell-shaped (see
Figure 11.4). This curve is typically divided into four stages: introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.37
1.
2.
3.
4.

Introduction—A period of slow sales growth as the product is introduced in the market.
Profits are nonexistent because of the heavy expenses of product introduction.
Growth—A period of rapid market acceptance and substantial profit improvement.
Maturity—A slowdown in sales growth because the product has achieved acceptance by most
potential buyers. Profits stabilize or decline because of increased competition.
Decline—Sales show a downward drift and profits erode.

We can use the PLC concept to analyze a product category (liquor), a product form (white
liquor), a product (vodka), or a brand (Smirnoff). Not all products exhibit a bell-shaped PLC.38
Three common alternate patterns are shown in
Figure 11.5.
Figure 11.5(a) shows a growth-slump-maturity pattern, characteristic of small kitchen appliances,
for example, such as handheld mixers and bread makers. Sales grow rapidly when the product is first
introduced and then fall to a “petrified” level sustained by late adopters buying the product for the
first time and early adopters replacing it.

|Fig. 11.4|

Sales
Sales and Profits ($)

Sales and Profit Life
Cycles

Profit

Introduction

Growth

Maturity
Time

Decline

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

Primary
cycle

Time

Recycle

(c) Scalloped Pattern

Sales Volume

(b) Cycle-Recycle Pattern

Sales Volume

Sales Volume

(a) Growth-Slump-Maturity Pattern

| CHAPTER 11

Time

Time

|Fig. 11.5|

Common Product Life-Cycle Patterns
The cycle-recycle pattern in Figure 11.5(b) often describes the sales of new drugs. The pharmaceutical company aggressively promotes its new drug, producing the first cycle. Later, sales start declining,
and another promotion push produces a second cycle (usually of smaller magnitude and duration).39
Another common pattern is the scalloped PLC in Figure 11.5(c). Here, sales pass through a succession of life cycles based on the discovery of new-product characteristics, uses, or users. Sales of
nylon have shown a scalloped pattern because of the many new uses—parachutes, hosiery, shirts,
carpeting, boat sails, automobile tires—discovered over time.40

Style, Fashion, and Fad Life Cycles
We need to distinguish three special categories of product life cycles—styles, fashions, and fads
(
Figure 11.6). A style is a basic and distinctive mode of expression appearing in a field of
human endeavor. Styles appear in homes (colonial, ranch, Cape Cod), clothing (formal, business
casual, sporty), and art (realistic, surrealistic, abstract). A style can last for generations and go in
and out of vogue. A fashion is a currently accepted or popular style in a given field. Fashions pass
through four stages: distinctiveness, emulation, mass fashion, and decline.41
The length of a fashion cycle is hard to predict. One view is that fashions end because they represent a purchase compromise, and consumers soon start looking for the missing attributes.42 For example, as automobiles become smaller, they become less comfortable, and then a growing number of
buyers start wanting larger cars. Another explanation is that too many consumers adopt the fashion,
thus turning others away. Still another is that the length of a particular fashion cycle depends on the
extent to which the fashion meets a genuine need, is consistent with other trends in the society, satisfies societal norms and values, and keeps within technological limits as it develops.43
Fads are fashions that come quickly into public view, are adopted with great zeal, peak early, and
decline very fast. Their acceptance cycle is short, and they tend to attract only a limited following
who are searching for excitement or want to distinguish themselves from others. Fads fail to survive
because they don’t normally satisfy a strong need. The marketing winners are those who recognize
fads early and leverage them into products with staying power. Here’s a success story of a company
that managed to take a fad and make it a long-term success story.

Style

Fashion

Fad

|Fig. 11.6|

Time

Sales

Sales

Sales

Style, Fashion, and
Fad Life Cycles

Time

Time

311

312

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Trivial Pursuit Since its debut at the International Toy Fair in 1982, Trivial Pursuit
has sold 88 million copies in 17 languages in 26 countries, and it remains one of the best-selling
adult games. Parker Brothers has kept it popular by making a new game with updated questions
every year. It also keeps creating offshoots—travel packs, a children’s version, Trivial Pursuit
Genus IV, and themed versions tapping into niches tied to various sports, movies, and decades—
23 different versions in all. The game is available in a variety of platforms: as
an interactive CD-ROM from Virgin Entertainment Interactive, online at its
own Web site (www.trivialpursuit.com), and in a mobile edition accessible via
cell phone. If you’re having trouble making dinner conversation on a date—
no problem: NTN Entertainment Network has put Trivial Pursuit in about
3,000 restaurants.44

Marketing Strategies: Introduction
Stage and the Pioneer Advantage

Through countless variations,
Trivial Pursuit has proven to be
more than a passing fad.

Because it takes time to roll out a new product, work out the technical
problems, fill dealer pipelines, and gain consumer acceptance, sales
growth tends to be slow in the introduction stage.45 Profits are negative or low, and promotional expenditures are at their highest ratio to
sales because of the need to (1) inform potential consumers, (2) induce product trial, and (3) secure distribution in retail outlets.46
Firms focus on buyers who are the most ready to buy. Prices tend to be higher because costs are high.
Companies that plan to introduce a new product must decide when to enter the market. To be
first can be rewarding, but risky and expensive. To come in later makes sense if the firm can bring
superior technology, quality, or brand strength to create a market advantage.
Speeding up innovation time is essential in an age of shortening product life cycles. Being early
has been shown to pay. One study found that products coming out six months late—but on
budget—earned an average of 33 percent less profit in their first five years; products that came out
on time but 50 percent over budget cut their profits by only 4 percent.47
Most studies indicate the market pioneer gains the greatest advantage.48 Campbell, Coca-Cola,
Hallmark, and Amazon.com developed sustained market dominance. Nineteen of twenty-five market
leaders in 1923 were still the market leaders in 1983, 60 years later.49 In a sample of industrial-goods
businesses, 66 percent of pioneers survived at least 10 years, versus 48 percent of early followers.50
What are the sources of the pioneer’s advantage?51 Early users will recall the pioneer’s brand
name if the product satisfies them. The pioneer’s brand also establishes the attributes the product
class should possess.52 It normally aims at the middle of the market and so captures more users.
Customer inertia also plays a role; and there are producer advantages: economies of scale, technological leadership, patents, ownership of scarce assets, and other barriers to entry. Pioneers can
spend marketing dollars more effectively and enjoy higher rates of repeat purchases. An alert pioneer can lead indefinitely by pursuing various strategies.53
But the advantage is not inevitable.54 Bowmar (hand calculators), Apple’s Newton (personal
digital assistant), Netscape (Web browser), Reynolds (ballpoint pens), and Osborne (portable computers) were market pioneers overtaken by later entrants. First movers also have to watch out for
the “second-mover advantage.”
Steven Schnaars studied 28 industries where imitators surpassed the innovators.55 He found
several weaknesses among the failing pioneers, including new products that were too crude, were
improperly positioned, or appeared before there was strong demand; product-development costs
that exhausted the innovator’s resources; a lack of resources to compete against entering larger
firms; and managerial incompetence or unhealthy complacency. Successful imitators thrived by offering lower prices, improving the product more continuously, or using brute market power to
overtake the pioneer. None of the companies that now dominate in the manufacture of personal
computers—including Dell, HP, and Acer—were first movers.56
Peter Golder and Gerald Tellis raise further doubts about the pioneer advantage.57 They distinguish between an inventor, first to develop patents in a new-product category, a product pioneer,
first to develop a working model, and a market pioneer, first to sell in the new-product category.

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

They also include nonsurviving pioneers in their sample. They conclude that although pioneers
may still have an advantage, a larger number of market pioneers fail than has been reported, and a
larger number of early market leaders (though not pioneers) succeed. Later entrants overtaking
market pioneers include IBM over Sperry in mainframe computers, Matsushita over Sony in VCRs,
and GE over EMI in CAT scan equipment.
Tellis and Golder more recently identified five factors underpinning long-term market leadership: vision of a mass market, persistence, relentless innovation, financial commitment, and asset
leverage.58 Other research has highlighted the importance of the novelty of the product innovation.59 When a pioneer starts a market with a really new product, like the Segway Human
Transporter, surviving can be very challenging. In the case of incremental innovation, like MP3
players with video capabilities, survival rates are much higher.
The pioneer should visualize the product markets it could enter, knowing it cannot enter all of
them at once. Suppose market-segmentation analysis reveals the product market segments shown
in
Figure 11.7. The pioneer should analyze the profit potential of each product market singly
and in combination and decide on a market expansion path. Thus, the pioneer in Figure 11.7 plans
first to enter product market P1M1, then move the product into a second market (P1M2), then surprise the competition by developing a second product for the second market (P2M2), then take the
second product back into the first market (P2M1), then launch a third product for the first market
(P3M1). If this game plan works, the pioneer firm will own a good part of the first two segments
and serve them with two or three products.

Marketing Strategies: Growth Stage
The growth stage is marked by a rapid climb in sales. Early adopters like the product and additional
consumers start buying it. New competitors enter, attracted by the opportunities. They introduce
new product features and expand distribution.
Prices stabilize or fall slightly, depending on how fast demand increases. Companies maintain
promotional expenditures or raise them slightly, to meet competition and continue to educate the
market. Sales rise much faster than promotional expenditures, causing a welcome decline in the
promotion–sales ratio. Profits increase as promotion costs are spread over a larger volume, and unit
manufacturing costs fall faster than price declines, owing to the producer-learning effect. Firms
must watch for a change to a decelerating rate of growth in order to prepare new strategies.
To sustain rapid market share growth now, the firm:
•
•
•
•
•
•

improves product quality and adds new features and improved styling.
adds new models and flanker products (of different sizes, flavors, and so forth) to protect the
main product.
enters new market segments.
increases its distribution coverage and enters new distribution channels.
shifts from awareness and trial communications to preference and loyalty communications.
lowers prices to attract the next layer of price-sensitive buyers.

By spending money on product improvement, promotion, and distribution, the firm can capture a dominant position. It trades off maximum current profit for high market share and the hope
of even greater profits in the next stage.

Marketing Strategies: Maturity Stage
At some point, the rate of sales growth will slow, and the product will enter a stage of relative maturity.
Most products are in this stage of the life cycle, which normally lasts longer than the preceding ones.
The maturity stage divides into three phases: growth, stable, and decaying maturity. In the first,
sales growth starts to slow. There are no new distribution channels to fill. New competitive forces
emerge. In the second phase, sales per capita flatten because of market saturation. Most potential
consumers have tried the product, and future sales depend on population growth and replacement
demand. In the third phase, decaying maturity, the absolute level of sales starts to decline, and customers begin switching to other products.
This third phase poses the most challenges. The sales slowdown creates overcapacity in the industry, which intensifies competition. Weaker competitors withdraw. A few giants dominate—perhaps a
quality leader, a service leader, and a cost leader—and profit mainly through high volume and lower

| CHAPTER 11
M1

M2

P1

1

2

P2

4

3

P3

5

313

M3

|Fig. 11.7|

Long-Range Product
Market Expansion
Strategy (Pi = product
i; Mj = market j)

314

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

costs. Surrounding them is a multitude of market nichers, including market specialists, product specialists, and customizing firms.
The question is whether to struggle to become one of the big three and achieve profits through
high volume and low cost, or pursue a niching strategy and profit through low volume and high
margins. Sometimes the market will divide into low- and high-end segments, and market shares of
firms in the middle steadily erode. Here’s how Swedish appliance manufacturer, Electrolux, has
coped with this situation.

Electrolux AB In 2002, Electrolux faced a rapidly polarizing appliance market. Low-cost Asian companies such as Haier, LG, and Samsung were applying downward
price pressure, while premium competitors like Bosch, Sub-Zero, and Viking were growing at
the expense of the middle-of-the-road brands. Electrolux’s new CEO Hans Stråberg decided to
escape the middle by rethinking Electrolux customers’ wants and needs. He segmented
the market according to the lifestyle and purchasing patterns of about
20 different types of consumers. Electrolux now successfully markets its
steam ovens to health-oriented consumers, for example, and its compact
dishwashers, originally for smaller kitchens, to a broader consumer segment that washes dishes more often. To companies stuck in the middle of
a mature market, Stråberg offers this advice: “Start with consumers and
understand what their latent needs are and what problems they experience . . . then put the puzzle together yourself to discover what people
really want to have. Henry Ford is supposed to have said, ‘If I had asked
people what they really wanted, I would have made faster horses’ or
something like that. You need to figure out what people really want, although they can’t express it.”60
Some companies abandon weaker products to concentrate on
new and more profitable ones. Yet they may be ignoring the high
potential many mature markets and old products still have.
Industries widely thought to be mature—autos, motorcycles, television, watches, cameras—were proved otherwise by the Japanese,
who found ways to offer customers new value. Three ways to
change the course for a brand are market, product, and marketing
program modifications.
Electrolux uses an elaborate segmentation plan and an expansive
product line to make sure its brand
is not stuck in the middle of a
shrinking market.

MARKET MODIFICATION A company might try to expand the market for its mature brand

by working with the two factors that make up sales volume: Volume = number of brand users ×
usage rate per user, as in
Table 11.1, but may also be matched by competitors.

PRODUCT MODIFICATION Managers also try to stimulate sales by improving quality,
features, or style. Quality improvement increases functional performance by launching a “new
and improved” product. Feature improvement adds size, weight, materials, supplements, and
accessories that expand the product’s performance, versatility, safety, or convenience. Style
improvement increases the product’s esthetic appeal. Any of these can attract consumer attention.
MARKETING PROGRAM MODIFICATION Finally, brand managers might also try to
stimulate sales by modifying nonproduct elements—price, distribution, and communications in
particular. They should assess the likely success of any changes in terms of effects on new and
existing customers.

Marketing Strategies: Decline Stage
Sales decline for a number of reasons, including technological advances, shifts in consumer tastes,
and increased domestic and foreign competition. All can lead to overcapacity, increased price

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

TABLE 11.1

Alternate Ways to Increase Sales Volume

Expand the Number of Users

Increase the Usage Rates Among Users

• Convert nonusers. The key to the growth of
air freight service was the constant search
for new users to whom air carriers can
demonstrate the benefits of using air freight
rather than ground transportation.

• Have consumers use the product on more
occasions. Serve Campbell’s soup for
a snack. Use Heinz vinegar to clean
windows.

• Enter new market segments. When
Goodyear decided to sell its tires via Walmart,
Sears, and Discount Tire, it immediately
boosted its market share.

• Have consumers use more of the product
on each occasion. Drink a larger glass of
orange juice.

• Attract competitors’ customers. Marketers
of Puffs facial tissues are always wooing
Kleenex customers.

• Have consumers use the product in new
ways. Use Tums antacid as a calcium
supplement.

cutting, and profit erosion. The decline might be slow, as for sewing machines and newspapers, or
rapid, as for 5.25 floppy disks and eight-track cartridges. Sales may plunge to zero or petrify at a low
level. These structural changes are different from a short-term decline resulting from a marketing
crisis of some sort. “Marketing Insight: Managing a Brand Crisis,” describes strategies for a brand in
temporary trouble.
As sales and profits decline over a long period of time, some firms withdraw. Those remaining
may reduce the number of products they offer, withdrawing from smaller segments and weaker
trade channels, cutting marketing budgets, and reducing prices further. Unless strong reasons for
retention exist, carrying a weak product is often very costly.
Besides being unprofitable, weak products consume a disproportionate amount of management’s time, require frequent price and inventory adjustments, incur expensive setup for short
production runs, draw advertising and sales force attention better used to make healthy products
more profitable, and cast a negative shadow on company image. Failing to eliminate them also
delays the aggressive search for replacement products, creating a lopsided product mix long on
yesterday’s breadwinners and short on tomorrow’s.
Unfortunately, most companies have not developed a policy for handling aging products. The
first task is to establish a system for identifying them. Many companies appoint a product-review
committee with representatives from marketing, R&D, manufacturing, and finance who, based on
all available information, makes a recommendation for each product—leave it alone, modify its
marketing strategy, or drop it.61
Some firms abandon declining markets earlier than others. Much depends on the height of exit
barriers in the industry.62 The lower the barriers, the easier for firms to leave the industry, and the
more tempting for the remaining firms to stay and attract the withdrawing firms’ customers.
Procter & Gamble stayed in the declining liquid-soap business and improved its profits as others
withdrew.
The appropriate strategy also depends on the industry’s relative attractiveness and the company’s competitive strength in it. A company in an unattractive industry that possesses competitive
strength should consider shrinking selectively. A company in an attractive industry that has competitive strength should consider strengthening its investment. Companies that successfully restage
or rejuvenate a mature product often do so by adding value to it.
Strategies for harvesting and divesting are quite different. Harvesting calls for gradually reducing a product or business’s costs while trying to maintain sales. The first step is to cut R&D costs
and plant and equipment investment. The company might also reduce product quality, sales force
size, marginal services, and advertising expenditures, ideally without letting customers, competitors, and employees know what is happening. Harvesting is difficult to execute, yet many mature
products warrant this strategy. It can substantially increase current cash flow.63
When a company decides to divest a product with strong distribution and residual goodwill, it
can probably sell the product to another firm. Some firms specialize in acquiring and revitalizing

| CHAPTER 11

315

316

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Marketing Insight
Managing a Brand Crisis
Marketing managers must assume a brand crisis will someday arise.
Whole Foods, Taco Bell, JetBlue, and toy and pet food brands have all
experienced potentially crippling brand crises, and AIG, Merrill Lynch,
and Citi were rocked by investment lending scandals that eroded consumer trust. Widespread repercussions include (1) lost sales, (2) reduced effectiveness of marketing activities for the product, (3) increased
sensitivity to rivals’ marketing activities, and (4) reduced impact of the
firm’s marketing activities on competing brands.
In general, the stronger brand equity and corporate image are—
especially credibility and trustworthiness—the more likely the firm can
weather the storm. Careful preparation and a well-managed crisis management program, however, are also critical. As Johnson & Johnson’s
nearly flawless handling of the Tylenol product-tampering incident suggests, the key is that consumers see the firm’s response as both swift
and sincere. They must feel an immediate sense that the company truly
cares. Listening is not enough.
The longer the firm takes to respond, the more likely consumers
can form negative impressions from unfavorable media coverage or
word of mouth. Perhaps worse, they may find they don’t like the brand
after all and permanently switch. Getting in front of a problem with PR,
and perhaps ads, can help avoid those problems.

Consider Perrier. In 1994, Perrier was forced to halt production
worldwide and recall all existing product when traces of benzene, a known
carcinogen, were found in excessive quantities in its bottled water. Over
the next weeks it offered several explanations, creating confusion and
skepticism. Perhaps more damaging, the product was off shelves for over
three months. Despite an expensive relaunch featuring ads and promotions, the brand struggled to regain lost market share, and a full year later
sales were less than half what they had been. With its key “purity” association tarnished, Perrier had no other compelling points-of-difference.
Consumers and retailers had found satisfactory substitutes, and the brand
never recovered. Eventually it was taken over by Nestlé SA.
Second, the more sincere the firm’s response—a public acknowledgment of the impact on consumers and willingness to take necessary
steps—the less likely consumers will form negative attributions. When
consumers reported finding shards of glass in some jars of its baby food,
Gerber tried to reassure the public there were no problems in its manufacturing plants but adamantly refused to withdraw products from stores.
After market share slumped from 66 percent to 52 percent within a couple of months, one company official admitted, “Not pulling our baby food
off the shelf gave the appearance that we aren’t a caring company.”
Sources: Norman Klein and Stephen A. Greyser, “The Perrier Recall: A Source of
Trouble,” Harvard Business School Case #9-590-104 and “The Perrier Relaunch,”
Harvard Business School Case #9-590-130; Harald Van Heerde, Kristiaan Helsen,
and Marnik G. Dekimpe, “The Impact of a Product-Harm Crisis on Marketing
Effectiveness,” Marketing Science 26 (March–April 2007), pp. 230–45; Michelle L.
Roehm and Alice M. Tybout, “When Will a Brand Scandal Spill Over and How
Should Competitors Respond?” Journal of Marketing Research 43 (August 2006),
pp. 366–73; Michelle L. Roehm and Michael K. Brady, “Consumer Responses to
Performance Failures by High Equity Brands,” Journal of Consumer Research, 34
(December 2007), pp. 537–45; Alice M. Tybout and Michelle Roehm, “Let the
Response Fit the Scandal,” Harvard Business Review, December 2009, pp. 82–88;
Andrew Pierce, “Managing Reputation to Rebuild Battered Brands, Marketing
News, March 15, 2009, p. 19; Kevin O’Donnell, “In a Crisis Actions Matter,”
Marketing News, April 15, 2009, p. 22.

“orphan” or “ghost” brands that larger firms want to divest or that have encountered bankruptcy
such as Linens n’ Things, Folgers and Brim coffee, Nuprin pain reliever, and Salon Selective shampoos.64 These firms attempt to capitalize on the residue of awareness in the market to develop a
brand revitalization strategy. Reserve Brands bought Eagle Snacks in part because research showed
6 of 10 adults remembered the brand, leading Reserve’s CEO to observe, “It would take $300 million to $500 million to recreate that brand awareness today.”65
If the company can’t find any buyers, it must decide whether to liquidate the brand quickly or
slowly. It must also decide how much inventory and service to maintain for past customers.

Evidence for the Product Life-Cycle Concept
Table 11.2 summarizes the characteristics, marketing objectives, and marketing strategies of
the four stages of the product life cycle. The PLC concept helps marketers interpret product and
market dynamics, conduct planning and control, and do forecasting. One recent study of 30 product categories unearthed a number of interesting findings concerning the PLC:66
•
•

New consumer durables show a distinct takeoff, after which sales increase by roughly 45 percent
a year, but they also show a distinct slowdown, when sales decline by roughly 15 percent a year.
Slowdown occurs at 34 percent penetration on average, well before most households own a
new product.

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

•
•

| CHAPTER 11

317

The growth stage lasts a little over eight years and does not seem to shorten over time.
Informational cascades exist, meaning people are more likely to adopt over time if others
already have, instead of by making careful product evaluations. One implication is that
product categories with large sales increases at takeoff tend to have larger sales declines at
slowdown.

Critique of the Product Life-Cycle Concept
PLC theory has its share of critics, who claim life-cycle patterns are too variable in shape
and duration to be generalized, and that marketers can seldom tell what stage their product is
in. A product may appear mature when it has actually reached a plateau prior to another
upsurge. Critics also charge that, rather than an inevitable course, the PLC pattern is the selffulfilling result of marketing strategies, and that skillful marketing can in fact lead to continued growth.67

Market Evolution
Because the PLC focuses on what’s happening to a particular product or brand rather than the
overall market, it yields a product-oriented rather than a market-oriented picture. Firms also need
to visualize a market’s evolutionary path as it is affected by new needs, competitors, technology,
channels, and other developments and change product and brand positioning to keep pace.68 Like
products, markets evolve through four stages: emergence, growth, maturity, and decline. Consider
the evolution of the paper towel market.

TABLE 11.2

Summary of Product Life-Cycle Characteristics, Objectives, and Strategies
Introduction

Growth

Maturity

Decline

Sales

Low sales

Rapidly rising sales

Peak sales

Declining sales

Costs

High cost per customer

Average cost per customer

Low cost per customer

Low cost per customer

Profits

Negative

Rising profits

High profits

Declining profits

Customers

Innovators

Early adopters

Middle majority

Laggards

Competitors

Few

Growing number

Stable number beginning
to decline

Declining number

Create product
awareness and trial

Maximize market share

Maximize profit while defending
market share

Reduce expenditure
and milk the brand

Product

Offer a basic product

Offer product extensions,
service, warranty

Diversify brands and items
models

Phase out weak products

Price

Charge cost-plus

Price to penetrate market

Price to match or best
competitors’

Cut price

Distribution

Build selective distribution

Build intensive distribution

Build more intensive distribution

Go selective: phase out
unprofitable outlets

Communications

Build product awareness
and trial among early
adopters and dealers

Build awareness and
interest in the mass
market

Stress brand differences and
benefits and encourage brand
switching

Reduce to minimal level
needed to retain hard-core
loyals

Characteristics

Marketing
Objectives

Strategies

Sources: Chester R. Wasson, Dynamic Competitive Strategy and Product Life Cycles (Austin, TX: Austin Press, 1978); John A. Weber, “Planning Corporate Growth with Inverted Product Life Cycles,” Long
Range Planning (October 1976), pp. 12–29; Peter Doyle, “The Realities of the Product Life Cycle,” Quarterly Review of Marketing (Summer 1976).

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

Paper Towels

318

Paper Towels Homemakers originally used cotton and linen dishcloths and

towels in their kitchens. Then a paper company looking for new markets developed paper towels, crystallizing a latent market that other manufacturers entered. The number of brands grew
and created market fragmentation. Industry overcapacity led manufacturers to search for new
features. One manufacturer, hearing consumers complain that paper towels were not absorbent, introduced “absorbent” towels and increased its market share. Competitors produced their own
versions of absorbent paper towels, and the market fragmented again. One manufacturer introduced a
“superstrength” towel that was soon copied. Another introduced a “lint-free” towel, subsequently copied.
The latest innovation is wipes containing a cleaning agent (like Clorox Disinfecting Wipes) that are often
surface-specific (for wood, metal, stone). Thus, driven by innovation and competition, paper towels evolved
from a single product to one with various absorbencies, strengths, and applications.

Marketing in an Economic
Downturn
Given economic cycles, there will always be tough times, such as 2008–2010 in many parts of the
world. Despite reduced funding for marketing programs and intense pressure to justify them as
cost effective, some marketers survived—or even thrived—in the recession. Here are five guidelines
to improve the odds for success during an economic downturn.

Explore the Upside of Increasing Investment
Sainsbury’s no-nonsense value appeal was just the right message to
send to UK customers in the midst
of a recession.

Does it pay to invest during a recession? Although the severity of the recent downturn took firms
into uncharted territory, 40 years of evidence suggests those willing to invest during a recession
have, on average, improved their fortunes when compared with those that cut back.69
The amount of investment isn’t all that matters. Firms that
received the most benefit from increasing marketing investments
during a recession were often those best able to exploit a marketplace advantage such as an appealing new product, a weakened
rival, or development of a neglected target market. With such
strong evidence, marketers should consider the potential upside
and positive payback of an increased investment that seizes market
opportunities. Here are two companies that made such a decision.
•

•

General Mills increased marketing expenditures for the 2009
fiscal year by 16 percent, increased revenues by 8 percent to
$14.7 billion, and increased its operating profit by 4 percent. As
CEO Ken Powell explained, “In an environment where you
have consumers going to the grocery store more often and
thinking more about meals at home, we think that is a great
environment for brand building, to remind consumers about
our products.”70
UK supermarket giant Sainsbury launched an advertising and
in-store point-of-sale campaign called “Feed Your Family for a
Fiver” that played off its corporate slogan, “Try Something New
Today,” to encourage shoppers to try new recipes that would
feed families for only £5.

Get Closer to Customers
In tough times, consumers may change what they want and can afford,
where and how they shop, even what they want to see and hear from a
firm. A downturn is an opportunity for marketers to learn even more
about what consumers are thinking, feeling, and doing, especially the
loyal customer base that yields so much of a brand’s profitability.71

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

| CHAPTER 11

Firms should characterize any changes as temporary adjustments versus permanent shifts.72 In
explaining why it is important to look forward during a recession, Eaton CEO Alex Cutler noted,“It is
a time when businesses shouldn’t be assuming that the future will be like the past. And I mean that in
virtually every dimension whether it is economic growth, value propositions, or the level of government regulation and involvement.”73
At the peak—the bottom—of the recession, a Booz & Company survey of 1,000 U.S. households
found 43 percent were eating at home more and 25 percent were cutting spending on hobbies and
sports activities. In both cases, respondents said they would likely do so even when the economy
improved.74 With consumer confidence at its lowest in decades, spending shifted in many ways. As one
retail analyst commented, “Moms who used to buy every member of the family their own brand of
shampoo are buying one big cheap one.”75
The potential value and profitability of some target consumers may change. Marketers should
evaluate this factor to fine-tune their marketing program and capitalize on new insights. After unsuccessfully chasing twenty-somethings with trendier clothing, Old Navy refocused its message to
target a budget-conscious mom shopping for herself and the family.76

Review Budget Allocations
Budget allocations can be sticky and not change enough to reflect a fluid marketing environment. We’ve
seen repeatedly that the vast penetration of the Internet, improved functionality of the cell phone, and
increased importance of events, experiences, and emotions as marketing opportunities have dramatically changed the marketing communications and channels environment in just five years.
A recession provides an opportunity for marketers to closely review how much and in what ways
they are spending their money. Budget reallocations can open up promising new options and eliminate
sacred-cow approaches that no longer provide sufficient revenue benefits. Underperforming distributors can be weeded out and incentives provided to motivate the more effective product sellers.
Marketing communications allow much experimentation. In London, T-Mobile created spontaneous, large-scale, interactive “happenings” to convey its brand positioning that “Life’s for
Sharing” and generate massive publicity. Its “Dance” video, featuring 400 dancers getting the whole
Liverpool tube station to dance, was viewed millions of times on YouTube.77
Firms as diverse as Century 21 realtors and Red Robin gourmet
burgers increased their Internet marketing activities during the recession.78 The 120,000 U.S. dental practices were not immune to
the economic downturn, as patients chose to postpone dental
work and even skip routine cleanings. Many dentists turned to
marketing and increased personal communications with patients
via e-mail newsletters, calls to set up appointments, and even
Twitter messages to share new product or service developments.79

Put Forth the Most Compelling
Value Proposition
One mistake in a recession is to be overly focused on price reductions
and discounts, which can harm long-term brand equity and price integrity. Marketers should increase—and clearly communicate—the
value their brands offer, making sure consumers appreciate all
the financial, logistical, and psychological benefits compared with the
competition.80 The more expensive the item, the more important this value
framing becomes. In the recent recession, GE changed its ad messages for
the $3,500 Profile washer-and-dryer set to emphasize its practicality—it
optimizes the use of soap and water per load to reduce waste and saves
customers money by being gentle on clothes, extending their life.81
Marketers should also review pricing to ensure it has not crept up
over time and no longer reflects good value. Procter & Gamble
adopted a “surgical” approach to reducing prices in specific categories
in which its brands were perceived as costing too much compared
with competitive products. At the same, it launched communications
about the innovativeness and value of its many other brands to help

To reflect more challenging
economic times, GE Profile
changed its ad strategy to
emphasize practicality.

319

320

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

ensure consumers would continue to pay their premium prices. Ads for Bounty claimed it was more
absorbent than a “bargain brand” of paper towels; headlines in print ads for Olay Professional Pro-X’s
Intensive Wrinkle Protocol proclaimed, “As Effective at Wrinkle Reduction as What the Doctor
Prescribed. At Half the Price.”82

Fine-tune Brand and Product Offerings

Armani

Marketers must ensure they have the right products to sell to the right consumers in the right places
and times. They can review product portfolios and brand architecture to confirm that brands and
sub-brands are clearly differentiated, targeted, and supported based on their prospects. Luxury brands
can benefit from lower-priced brands or sub-brands in their portfolios. Take Armani as an example.

Armani Armani differentiates its product line into three tiers distinct in style, luxury,

customization, and price. In the most expensive, Tier I, it sells Giorgio Armani and Giorgio
Armani Privé, custom-made couture products that sell for thousands of dollars. In Tier II, it
offers Emporio Armani—young, modern, more affordable styles—and Armani jeans that
convey technology and ecology. In lower-priced Tier III are more youthful and street-savvy
translations of Armani style, A|X Armani Exchange, sold at retail locations in cities and suburban malls. The
brand architecture has been carefully devised so each extension lives up to the core promise of the Armani
brand without diluting the parent’s image. But clear differentiation also exists, minimizing consumer
confusion and brand cannibalization. In tough economic times, the lower end picks up the selling slack and
helps maintain profitability.
Because different brands or sub-brands appeal to different economic segments, those that target
the lower end of the socioeconomic spectrum may be particularly important during a recession.
Value-driven companies such as McDonald’s, Walmart, Costco, Aldi, Dell, E*TRADE, Southwest
Airlines, and IKEA are likely to benefit most. Spam, the oft-maligned gelatinous 12-ounce rectangle of spiced ham and pork, found its sales soaring during the recession. Affordably priced and requiring no refrigeration, Spam is, its maker Hormel claims, “like meat with a pause button.”83
Bad times also are an opportunity to prune brands or products with diminished prospects. In the
recession following the 9/11 tragedy, Procter & Gamble divested many stagnant brands such as Comet
cleanser, Folgers coffee, Jif peanut butter, and Crisco oil and shortening, to concentrate on highergrowth opportunities with much success.

Summary
1. A market leader has the largest market share in the relevant product market. To remain dominant, the leader
looks for ways to expand total market demand and attempts to protect and perhaps increase its current share.
2. A market challenger attacks the market leader and
other competitors in an aggressive bid for more market
share. There are five types of general attack; challengers must also choose specific attack strategies.
3. A market follower is a runner-up firm willing to maintain
its market share and not rock the boat. It can play the
role of counterfeiter, cloner, imitator, or adapter.
4. A market nicher serves small market segments not
being served by larger firms. The key to nichemanship
is specialization. Nichers develop offerings to fully meet
a certain group of customers’ needs, commanding a
premium price in the process.

5. As important as a competitive orientation is in
today’s global markets, companies should not overdo
the emphasis on competitors. They should maintain
a good balance of consumer and competitor monitoring.
6. Because economic conditions change and competitive
activity varies, companies normally must reformulate
their marketing strategy several times during a product’s
life cycle. Technologies, product forms, and brands also
exhibit life cycles with distinct stages. The life cycle
stages are usually introduction, growth, maturity, and
decline. Most products today are in the maturity stage.
7. Each product life cycle stage calls for different marketing
strategies. The introduction is marked by slow growth
and minimal profits. If successful, the product enters a
growth stage marked by rapid sales growth and increasing profits. There follows a maturity stage in which sales

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

growth slows and profits stabilize. Finally, the product
enters a decline stage. The company’s task is to identify
the truly weak products, develop a strategy for each,
and phase them out in a way that minimizes impact on
company profits, employees, and customers.

| CHAPTER 11

321

9. In a recession, marketers must explore the upside of
possibly increasing investments, get closer to customers, review budget allocations, put forth the most
compelling value proposition, and fine-tune brand and
product offerings.

8. Like products, markets evolve through four stages:
emergence, growth, maturity, and decline.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Do Brands Have Finite Lives?

Marketing Discussion
Industry Roles

Often, after a brand begins to slip in the marketplace or
disappears altogether, commentators observe, “All brands
have their day,” implying brands have a finite life and cannot
be expected to be leaders forever. Other experts contend
brands can live forever, and that their long-term success
depends on marketers’ skill and insight.
Take a position: Brands cannot be expected to last
forever versus There is no reason for a brand to ever become obsolete.

Pick an industry. Classify firms according to the four different
roles they might play: leader, challenger, follower, and nicher.
How would you characterize the nature of competition? Do
the firms follow the principles described in this chapter?

Marketing Excellence

>>Samsung

Korean consumer electronics giant Samsung has made
a remarkable transformation, from a provider of valuepriced commodity products that original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) sold under their own brands, to a
global marketer of premium-priced Samsung-branded
consumer electronics such as flat-screen TVs, digital
cameras, digital appliances, semiconductors, and cell
phones. Samsung’s high-end cell phones have been a
growth engine for the company, which has also released

a steady stream of innovations, popularizing the PDA
phone, the first cell phone with an MP3 player, and the
first Blu-ray disc player.
Samsung initially focused on volume and market
domination rather than profitability. However, during the
Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, when other Korean
chaebols collapsed beneath a mountain of debt, Samsung
took a different approach. It cut costs and reemphasized
product quality and manufacturing flexibility, which allowed
its consumer electronics to go from project phase to store
shelves within six months. Samsung invested heavily in
innovation and focused intently on its memory-chip business, which established an important cash cow and rapidly made the company the largest chip maker in the
world. The company continued to pour money into R&D
during the 2000s, budgeting $40 billion for 2005–2010. Its
focus on R&D and increasing digital convergence have let
Samsung introduce a wide range of electronic products
under its strong brand umbrella. The firm also partnered
with longtime market leader Sony to create a $2 billion
state-of-the-art LCD factory in South Korea and signed a
milestone agreement to share 24,000 basic patents for
components and production processes.
Samsung’s success has been driven not only by successful product innovation, but also by aggressive brand
building over the last decade. From 1998 to 2009, the
company spent over $7 billion in marketing, sponsored

322

PART 4

BUILDING STRONG BRANDS

six Olympics, and ran several global ad campaigns
themed “Imagine,” “Quietly Brilliant,” and “YOU,” all which
included brand messages such as “technology,” “design,”
and “sensation” (human). In 2005, Samsung surpassed
Sony in the Interbrand brand ranking for the first time and
continues to outperform Sony today.
The economic downturn during 2008 and 2009 significantly affected the semiconductor industry, overall
consumer electronics sales, and Samsung’s bottom line.
To survive, Samsung slashed profit margins, decreased
production, and cut inventories. As a result, the company
emerged at the end of 2009 with record-high quarterly
profits despite significantly smaller profit margins.
Today, Samsung is the global leader in flat-panel TVs
and memory chips, and the number two player in mobile
phones. It is focused on growing technologies such as
smart phones and has partnered with both Microsoft’s
Windows Mobile and Google’s Android software. In addition, Samsung has formed a green partnership with
Microsoft to help create energy-efficient computers.
Unlike rival firms, Samsung has become a global
leader by making both components for electronics
products and the actual devices sold to consumers,

Marketing Excellence

>>IBM

International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) manufactures and sells computer hardware and software, offers
infrastructure services, and provides global consulting services. It dates to the 1880s but became known as IBM only
in 1924, under the leadership of then-president Thomas J.
Watson Sr. Watson led IBM for four decades and helped establish some of its most successful and continuing business
tactics, such as exceptional customer service, a professional
and knowledgeable sales force, and a focus on large-scale,

and without acquiring major competitors. It has more
than doubled its employees from a decade ago to over
164,000 around the world. With record sales of $110 billion
in 2008, the company’s CEO, Lee Yoon-woo, announced
the firm hopes to hit $400 billion in revenue by the year
2020. To accomplish this aggressive goal, Samsung
will explore areas like health care and home energy
products.
Questions
1. What are some of Samsung’s greatest competitive
strengths?
2. Samsung’s goal of $400 billion in sales by 2020
would bring it to the same level as Walmart. Is this
feasible? Why or why not?
Sources: Moon Ihlwan, “Samsung Is Having a Sony Moment,” BusinessWeek, July 30, 2007, p. 38;
Martin Fackler, “Raising the Bar at Samsung,” New York Times, April 25, 2006; “Brand New,”
Economist, January 15, 2005, pp. 10–11; Patricia O’Connell, “Samsung’s Goal: Be Like BMW,”
BusinessWeek, August 1, 2005; Heidi Brown and Justin Doeble, “Samsung’s Next Act,” Forbes,
July 26, 2004; John Quelch and Anna Harrington, “Samsung Electronics Company: Global
Marketing Operations,” Harvard Business School, January 16, 2008; Evan Ramstad, “Samsung’s
Swelling Size Brings New Challenges,” Wall Street Journal, November 11, 2009; “Looking Good?
LG v. Samsung,” Economist, January 24, 2009.

custom-built solutions for businesses. Watson also created
the company’s first slogan, “THINK,” which quickly became
a corporate mantra.
From the 1910s to the 1940s, IBM’s growth exploded, led primarily by sales of tabulating machines,
which helped underpin the Social Security system in the
1930s, and of war-related technologies developed for the
military during World War I and World War II.
IBM evolved in the 1950s when Watson’s son,
Thomas J. Watson Jr., took over as CEO. It was under his
management that the company paved the way for innovations in computation. IBM worked with the government
during the Cold War and built the air-defense SAGE computer system at the price of $30 million. In 1964, the firm
launched a revolutionary large family of computers called
the System/360, which used interchangeable software
and peripheral equipment. For it to succeed, however,
IBM had to cannibalize its own computer product lines
and move its current systems to the new technology.
Fortunately the risk paid off, and IBM architecture became
the industry standard. By the 1960s, IBM was producing
approximately 70 percent of all computers, beating out
early competitors General Electric, RCA, and Honeywell.
The 1980s—the beginning of the personal computing
era—were pivotal for IBM. In 1981, the firm launched the first
personal computer, which offered 18KB of memory, floppy
disk drives, and an optional color monitor. IBM also opened

COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS

up new channels of distribution through companies like
Sears and ComputerLand. However, its decision to outsource components of the PC to companies like Microsoft
and Intel marked the end of IBM’s monopoly in computing.
During the 1980s, its market share and profits eroded as the
PC revolution changed the way consumers viewed and
bought technology. IBM’s sales dropped from $5 billion in
the early 1980s to $3 billion by 1989. The dip continued into
the early 1990s when IBM felt pressure from Compaq and
Dell and attempted to split the company into smaller business units to compete. The results were disastrous, and IBM
posted net losses of $16 billion between 1991 and 1993.
Things turned around when a new CEO, Louis
Gerstner, refocused the company in a new strategic direction. Gerstner reconnected the company’s business
units, shed its commodity products, and focused on highmargin businesses like consulting and middleware software. IBM then introduced the iconic ThinkPad, which
helped regain lost share. To rebuild its brand image, the
firm consolidated its marketing efforts from 70 advertising
agencies to 1 and created a consistent, universal message. In 1997, IBM’s chess-playing computer system,
Deep Blue, also helped lift IBM’s brand image by defeating
the world’s reigning chess champion in a historic event
that captured the attention of millions.
At the turn of the 21st century, IBM’s newest CEO,
Samuel Palmisano, led IBM to new levels of success in the
wake of the dot-com bust. He moved the company further
away from hardware by selling its ThinkPad division to
Lenovo and exiting disk drives. In addition, Palmisano embraced global consulting and data analytics by acquiring
close to 100 firms, including PricewaterhouseCoopers.

| CHAPTER 11

323

IBM now focuses on solving the world’s most challenging high-tech problems, such as better water management, lower traffic congestion, and collaborative health
care solutions. Its most recent campaign, entitled “Smarter
planet,” highlights a few of the company’s accomplishments to date and explores IBM’s ideas for the future.
Palmisano explained, “We are looking at huge problems
that couldn’t be solved before. We can solve congestion
and pollution. We can make the grids more efficient. And
quite honestly, it creates a big business opportunity.”
Today, IBM is the largest and most profitable information
technology company in the world, with over $103 billion in
sales and 388,000 employees worldwide. It employs scientists, engineers, consultants, and sales professionals in over
170 countries and holds more patents than any other U.S.based technology company. From 2000 to 2008, IBM spent
over $50 billion on R&D; and approximately 30 percent of its
annual R&D budget goes toward long-term research.
Questions
1. Few companies have had such a long history of ups
and downs as IBM. What were some of the keys to its
recent success? Can its plans to solve some of the
world’s most challenging problems succeed? Why or
why not?
2. Who are IBM’s biggest competitors today, and what
risks do they face with their current strategy?
Sources: Steve Lohr, “IBM Showing That Giants Can Be Nimble,” New York Times, July 18,
2007; Jeffrey M. O’Brien, “IBM’s Grand Plan to Save the Planet,” Fortune, April 21, 2009;
“IBM Archives,” IBM, www.ibm.com; Louis V. Gerstner Jr., Who Says Elephants Can’t Dance?
Inside IBM’s Historic Turnaround (New York: Harper Business, 2002).

PART 5 Shaping the Market Offerings
Chapter 12 | Setting Product Strategy
Chapter 13 | Designing and Managing Services
Chapter 14 | Developing Pricing Strategies and Programs

r
e
t
ap
h
C

12

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What are the characteristics of products, and how do marketers
classify products?
2. How can companies differentiate products?
3. Why is product design important and what factors affect a good design?
4. How can a company build and manage its product mix and
product lines?
5. How can companies combine products to create strong
co-brands or ingredient brands?
6. How can companies use packaging, labeling, warranties,
and guarantees as marketing tools?

This trade show debut in Shanghai,
China, in April 2009 was part of the
global launch of the highly anticipated
Ford Fiesta world car.

Setting Product Strategy
At the heart of a great brand is a great product. Product is a key element
in the market offering. To achieve market leadership, firms must offer products and services of
superior quality that provide unsurpassed customer value.

Ford Motor Company endured some tough times at the beginning of the 21st century. A safety controversy about its best-selling Ford Explorer and high gas prices
that hurt sales of its trucks and SUVs put the company in deep financial straits.
Perhaps the biggest concern was public perception that Ford products were not
high quality. A new CEO, Alan Mulally, arrived in 2006 determined to set Ford on a
different path. Rejecting government bailouts during the subsequent recession created some
goodwill, but Mulally knew reliable, stylish, and affordable vehicles that performed well would
make or break the company’s fortunes. A redesigned high-mileage Ford Fusion with innovative
Sync hands-free phone-and-entertainment system and an environmentally friendly hybrid option
caught customers’ attention, as did the hip, urban-looking seven-seat Ford Flex SUV with a center console mini-refrigerator.
Mulally felt it was critical to use Ford’s vast infrastructure and scale to create vehicles that,
with small adjustments, could easily be sold all over the world. The result of extensive global
research, the Ford Fiesta hatchback was a striking example of this world-car concept. The rear
of the car resembled a popular small sport-utility, its giant headlights were typical of more
expensive cars, and dashboard instruments were modeled after a cell phone keypad. The company knew it had a winner when the Fiesta won a uniformly positive response in Chinese,
European, and U.S. showrooms. Ford also relied on experiential and
social media in marketing. Before its U.S. launch, 150 Fiestas
Marketing planning begins with formulating an
toured the country for test drives and 100 were given to bloggers offering to meet target customers’ needs or wants. The
for six months to allow them to share their experiences. Ford’s customer will judge the offering by three basic elements:
product and marketing innovations paid off. While the rest of the product features and quality, services mix and quality, and price
U.S. auto industry continued to tank, the Fiesta garnered thousands (see
Figure 12.1). In this chapter we examine product, in
of preorders and Ford actually turned a profit in the first quarter Chapter 13, services, and in Chapter 14, price. All three elements
must be meshed into a competitively attractive offering.
of 2010.1

Product Characteristics
and Classifications
Many people think a product is tangible, but a product is anything that can be offered to a market
to satisfy a want or need, including physical goods, services, experiences, events, persons, places,
properties, organizations, information, and ideas.
325

326

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Value-based prices

Product Levels: The Customer-Value Hierarchy
In planning its market offering, the marketer needs to address five product levels (see
Figure 12.2).2
Each level adds more customer value, and the five constitute a customer-value hierarchy.

Attractiveness
of the market
offering
Product
features
and quality

•
Services
mix and
quality

|Fig. 12.1|

Components of the
Market Offering

•
•

•

•

The fundamental level is the core benefit: the service or benefit the customer is really buying.
A hotel guest is buying rest and sleep. The purchaser of a drill is buying holes. Marketers must
see themselves as benefit providers.
At the second level, the marketer must turn the core benefit into a basic product. Thus a hotel
room includes a bed, bathroom, towels, desk, dresser, and closet.
At the third level, the marketer prepares an expected product, a set of attributes and conditions buyers normally expect when they purchase this product. Hotel guests minimally expect
a clean bed, fresh towels, working lamps, and a relative degree of quiet.
At the fourth level, the marketer prepares an augmented product that exceeds customer expectations. In developed countries, brand positioning and competition take place at this level.
In developing and emerging markets such as India and Brazil, however, competition takes
place mostly at the expected product level.
At the fifth level stands the potential product, which encompasses all the possible augmentations and transformations the product or offering might undergo in the future.
Here is where companies search for new ways to satisfy customers and distinguish
their offering.

Differentiation arises and competition increasingly occurs on the basis of product augmentation, which also leads the marketer to look at the user’s total consumption system: the way the user
performs the tasks of getting and using products and related services.3 Each augmentation adds
cost, however, and augmented benefits soon become expected benefits and necessary points-ofparity in the category. If today’s hotel guests expect satellite television, high-speed Internet access,
and a fully equipped fitness center, competitors must search for still other features and benefits to
differentiate themselves.
As some companies raise the price of their augmented product, others offer a stripped-down
version for less. Thus, alongside the growth of fine hotels such as Four Seasons and Ritz-Carlton,
we see lower-cost hotels and motels emerge such as Motel 6 and Comfort Inn, catering to clients
who want simply the basic product. Striving to create an augmented product can be a key for
success, as Jamestown Container has experienced.

Jamestown Container Companies

What could be harder
to differentiate than corrugated containers? Yet Jamestown Container Companies, a leading
supplier of corrugated products for companies such as 3M, has formed strategic partnerships
with area manufacturers to provide every part of the shipping system. It offers not only boxes

|Fig. 12.2|

Five Product Levels

tial product
Poten
mented product
Aug
ected product
Exp
sic product
Ba

Core
benefit

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

327

but also tape, shrink-wrap, and everything else needed to display or ship a customer’s final product. “It’s a
combination for survival,” says the company’s chief operating officer. “More customers want to call one
place for everything. We have to keep reinventing ourselves and form these kinds of relationships to
remain competitive.”4

Product Classifications
Marketers classify products on the basis of durability, tangibility, and use (consumer or industrial).
Each type has an appropriate marketing-mix strategy.5

DURABILITY AND TANGIBILITY Products fall into three groups according to durability
and tangibility:
1.

2.

3.

Nondurable goods are tangible goods normally consumed in one or a few uses, such as beer
and shampoo. Because these goods are purchased frequently, the appropriate strategy is to
make them available in many locations, charge only a small markup, and advertise heavily to
induce trial and build preference.
Durable goods are tangible goods that normally survive many uses: refrigerators, machine
tools, and clothing. Durable products normally require more personal selling and service,
command a higher margin, and require more seller guarantees.
Services are intangible, inseparable, variable, and perishable products that normally require
more quality control, supplier credibility, and adaptability. Examples include haircuts, legal
advice, and appliance repairs.

CONSUMER-GOODS CLASSIFICATION When we classify the vast array of consumer
goods on the basis of shopping habits, we distinguish among convenience, shopping, specialty, and
unsought goods.
The consumer usually purchases convenience goods frequently, immediately, and with minimal
effort. Examples include soft drinks, soaps, and newspapers. Staples are convenience goods consumers purchase on a regular basis. A buyer might routinely purchase Heinz ketchup, Crest toothpaste, and Ritz crackers. Impulse goods are purchased without any planning or search effort, like
candy bars and magazines. Emergency goods are purchased when a need is urgent—umbrellas during a rainstorm, boots and shovels during the first winter snow. Manufacturers of impulse and
emergency goods will place them where consumers are likely to experience an urge or compelling
need to purchase.
Shopping goods are those the consumer characteristically compares on such bases as suitability,
quality, price, and style. Examples include furniture, clothing, and major appliances. Homogeneous
shopping goods are similar in quality but different enough in price to justify shopping comparisons.
Heterogeneous shopping goods differ in product features and services that may be more important
than price. The seller of heterogeneous shopping goods carries a wide assortment to satisfy individual tastes and trains salespeople to inform and advise customers.
Specialty goods have unique characteristics or brand identification for which enough buyers
are willing to make a special purchasing effort. Examples include cars, stereo components, and
men’s suits. A Mercedes is a specialty good because interested buyers will travel far to buy one.
Specialty goods don’t require comparisons; buyers invest time only to reach dealers carrying the
wanted products. Dealers don’t need convenient locations, although they must let prospective buyers know where to find them.
Unsought goods are those the consumer does not know about or normally think of buying,
such as smoke detectors. Classic examples of known but unsought goods are life insurance, cemetery plots, and gravestones. Unsought goods require advertising and personal-selling support.
INDUSTRIAL-GOODS CLASSIFICATION We classify industrial goods in terms of their
relative cost and how they enter the production process: materials and parts, capital items, and
supplies and business services. Materials and parts are goods that enter the manufacturer’s
product completely. They fall into two classes: raw materials, and manufactured materials and
parts. Raw materials fall into two major groups: farm products (wheat, cotton, livestock, fruits, and
vegetables) and natural products (fish, lumber, crude petroleum, iron ore). Farm products are
supplied by many producers, who turn them over to marketing intermediaries, who provide
assembly, grading, storage, transportation, and selling services. Their perishable and seasonal

Jamestown Containers is offering
additional packaging features to
provide more value to customers.

328

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

nature gives rise to special marketing practices, whereas their commodity character results in
relatively little advertising and promotional activity, with some exceptions. At times, commodity
groups will launch campaigns to promote their product—potatoes, cheese, and beef. Some
producers brand their products—Dole salads, Mott’s apples, and Chiquita bananas.
Natural products are limited in supply. They usually have great bulk and low unit value and
must be moved from producer to user. Fewer and larger producers often market them directly to
industrial users. Because users depend on these materials, long-term supply contracts are common.
The homogeneity of natural materials limits the amount of demand-creation activity. Price and
delivery reliability are the major factors influencing the selection of suppliers.
Manufactured materials and parts fall into two categories: component materials (iron, yarn,
cement, wires) and component parts (small motors, tires, castings). Component materials are usually fabricated further—pig iron is made into steel, and yarn is woven into cloth. The standardized
nature of component materials usually makes price and supplier reliability key purchase factors.
Component parts enter the finished product with no further change in form, as when small motors
are put into vacuum cleaners, and tires are put on automobiles. Most manufactured materials and
parts are sold directly to industrial users. Price and service are major marketing considerations,
with branding and advertising less important.
Capital items are long-lasting goods that facilitate developing or managing the finished product.
They include two groups: installations and equipment. Installations consist of buildings (factories,
offices) and heavy equipment (generators, drill presses, mainframe computers, elevators). Installations
are major purchases. They are usually bought directly from the producer, whose sales force includes
technical personnel, and a long negotiation precedes the typical sale. Producers must be willing to design
to specification and to supply postsale services. Advertising is much less important than personal selling.
Equipment includes portable factory equipment and tools (hand tools, lift trucks) and office
equipment (personal computers, desks). These types of equipment don’t become part of a finished
product. They have a shorter life than installations but a longer life than operating supplies.
Although some equipment manufacturers sell direct, more often they use intermediaries, because
the market is geographically dispersed, buyers are numerous, and orders are small. Quality, features, price, and service are major considerations. The sales force tends to be more important than
advertising, although advertising can be used effectively.
Supplies and business services are short-term goods and services that facilitate developing or
managing the finished product. Supplies are of two kinds: maintenance and repair items (paint,
nails, brooms) and operating supplies (lubricants, coal, writing paper, pencils). Together, they go
under the name of MRO goods. Supplies are the equivalent of convenience goods; they are usually
purchased with minimum effort on a straight-rebuy basis. They are normally marketed through intermediaries because of their low unit value and the great number and geographic dispersion of
customers. Price and service are important considerations, because suppliers are standardized and
brand preference is not high.
Business services include maintenance and repair services (window cleaning, copier repair) and
business advisory services (legal, management consulting, advertising). Maintenance and repair
services are usually supplied under contract by small producers or from the manufacturers of the
original equipment. Business advisory services are usually purchased on the basis of the supplier’s
reputation and staff.

Product and Services
Differentiation
To be branded, products must be differentiated. At one extreme are products that allow little variation: chicken, aspirin, and steel. Yet even here, some differentiation is possible: Perdue chickens,
Bayer aspirin, and India’s Tata Steel have carved out distinct identities in their categories. Procter &
Gamble makes Tide, Cheer, and Gain laundry detergents, each with a separate brand identity. At
the other extreme are products capable of high differentiation, such as automobiles, commercial
buildings, and furniture. Here the seller faces an abundance of differentiation possibilities, including form, features, customization, performance quality, conformance quality, durability, reliability,
repairability, and style.6 Design has become an increasingly important means of differentiation and
we will discuss it in a separate section later.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

329

Product Differentiation
FORM Many products can be differentiated in form—the size, shape, or physical structure of a
product. Consider the many possible forms of aspirin. Although essentially a commodity, it can be
differentiated by dosage size, shape, color, coating, or action time.
FEATURES Most products can be offered with varying features that supplement their basic
function. A company can identify and select appropriate new features by surveying recent buyers
and then calculating customer value versus company cost for each potential feature. Marketers
should consider how many people want each feature, how long it would take to introduce it, and
whether competitors could easily copy it.7
To avoid “feature fatigue,” the company must prioritize features and tell consumers how to use
and benefit from them.8 Companies must also think in terms of feature bundles or packages. Auto
companies often manufacture cars at several “trim levels.” This lowers manufacturing and inventory costs. Each company must decide whether to offer feature customization at a higher cost or a
few standard packages at a lower cost.
CUSTOMIZATION Marketers can differentiate products by customizing them. As companies
have grown proficient at gathering information about individual customers and business partners
(suppliers, distributors, retailers), and as their factories are being designed more flexibly, they have
increased their ability to individualize market offerings, messages, and media. Mass customization
is the ability of a company to meet each customer’s requirements—to prepare on a mass basis
individually designed products, services, programs, and communications.9
Levi’s and Lands’ End were among the first to introduce custom jeans. Other firms have introduced mass customization into other markets. Online retailers such as Zazzle and CafePress allow
users to upload images and create their own clothing and posters or buy merchandise created by
other users. Customers must know how to express their personal product preferences, however, or
be given assistance to best customize a product.10
PERFORMANCE QUALITY Most products occupy one of four performance levels: low,
average, high, or superior. Performance quality is the level at which the product’s primary
characteristics operate. Quality is increasingly important for differentiation as companies adopt a
value model and provide higher quality for less money. Firms should design a
performance level appropriate to the target market and competition, however, not
necessarily the highest level possible. They must also manage performance quality
through time. Continuously improving the product can produce high returns and
market share; failing to do so can have negative consequences.

Mercedes-Benz

From 2003 to 2006, Mercedes-Benz
endured one of its most painful stretches in its 127-year history. Its stellar quality
reputation took a beating in J.D. Power and other surveys, and BMW surpassed
it in global sales. To recoup, a new management team reorganized the company
around functional elements—motors, chassis, and electronic systems—instead
of by model lines. Engineers begin testing electronic systems a year earlier and put each new
model through 10,000 tests that ran 24 hours a day for three weeks. Mercedes tripled its
number of prototypes for new designs, allowing engineers to drive them 3 million miles before
production. With these and other changes, the number of flaws in the cars dropped 72 percent
from their 2002 peak and warranty costs decreased by 25 percent. As a side effect,
Mercedes-Benz dealers have had to contend with a sizable drop in their repair and service
businesses!11

CONFORMANCE QUALITY Buyers expect a high conformance quality, the
degree to which all produced units are identical and meet promised specifications.
Suppose a Porsche 911 is designed to accelerate to 60 miles per hour within
10 seconds. If every Porsche 911 coming off the assembly line does this, the model is

When Mercedes-Benz’s quality
ratings took a dive, the automaker
instituted a number of significant
changes to bring them back up.

330

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

said to have high conformance quality. A product with low conformance quality will disappoint
some buyers.

DURABILITY Durability, a measure of the product’s expected operating life under natural or
stressful conditions, is a valued attribute for vehicles, kitchen appliances, and other durable goods.
The extra price for durability must not be excessive, however, and the product must not be subject
to rapid technological obsolescence, as personal computers, televisions, and cell phones have
sometimes been.

RELIABILITY Buyers normally will pay a premium for more reliable products. Reliability is a
measure of the probability that a product will not malfunction or fail within a specified time
period. Maytag has an outstanding reputation for creating reliable home appliances. Its longrunning “Lonely Repairman” ad campaign was designed to highlight that attribute.

REPAIRABILITY Repairability measures the ease of fixing a product when it malfunctions or
fails. Ideal repairability would exist if users could fix the product themselves with little cost in
money or time. Some products include a diagnostic feature that allows service people to correct a
problem over the telephone or advise the user how to correct it. Many computer hardware
and software companies offer technical support over the phone, by fax or e-mail, or via real-time
chat online.

STYLE Style describes the product’s look and feel to the buyer. It creates distinctiveness that is
hard to copy. Car buyers pay a premium for Jaguars because of their extraordinary looks. Aesthetics
play a key role in such brands as Apple computers, Montblanc pens, Godiva chocolate, and HarleyDavidson motorcycles.12 Strong style does not always mean high performance, however. A car may
look sensational but spend a lot of time in the repair shop.

Services Differentiation
When the physical product cannot easily be differentiated, the key to competitive success may lie in
adding valued services and improving their quality. Rolls-Royce PLC has ensured its aircraft
engines are in high demand by continuously monitoring their health for 45 airlines through live
satellite feeds. Under its TotalCare program, airlines pay Rolls a fee for every hour an engine is in
flight, and Rolls assumes the risks and costs of downtime and repairs.13
The main service differentiators are ordering ease, delivery, installation, customer training,
customer consulting, and maintenance and repair.
Cemex guarantees cement delivery
as fast as placing a pizza order.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

ORDERING EASE Ordering ease refers to how easy it is for the customer to place an order with
the company. Baxter Healthcare supplies hospitals with computer terminals through which they
send orders directly to the firm. Many financial service institutions offer secure online sites to help
customers get information and complete transactions more efficiently.

DELIVERY Delivery refers to how well the product or service is brought to the customer. It includes
speed, accuracy, and care throughout the process. Today’s customers have grown to expect speed:
pizza delivered in one-half hour, eyeglasses made in one hour, cars lubricated in 15 minutes. Many
firms have computerized quick response systems (QRS) that link the information systems of their
suppliers, manufacturing plants, distribution centers, and retailing outlets. Cemex, a giant cement
company based in Mexico, has transformed its business by promising to deliver concrete faster than
pizza. It equips every truck with a global positioning system (GPS) so dispatchers know its real-time
location. If your load is more than 10 minutes late, you get up to a 20 percent discount.14

INSTALLATION Installation refers to the work done to make a product operational in its
planned location. Ease of installation is a true selling point for buyers of complex products like
heavy equipment and for technology novices.
CUSTOMER TRAINING Customer training helps the customer’s employees use the vendor’s
equipment properly and efficiently. General Electric not only sells and installs expensive X-ray
equipment in hospitals, it also gives extensive training to users. McDonald’s requires its new
franchisees to attend Hamburger University in Oak Brook, Illinois, for two weeks, to learn how to
manage the franchise properly.

CUSTOMER CONSULTING Customer consulting includes data, information systems, and
advice services the seller offers to buyers. Technology firms such as IBM, Oracle, and others have
learned that such consulting is an increasingly essential—and profitable—part of their business.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR Maintenance and repair programs help customers keep

Best Buy

purchased products in good working order. Firms such as Hewlett-Packard offer online technical
support, or “e-support,” for customers, who can search an online database for fixes or seek online
help from a technician. Even retailers are getting into the act.

Best Buy As consolidation and competitive pricing among electronics retailers con-

tinue, companies are increasingly looking for new ways to stand out in the crowd. That’s why
Best Buy contracted with the Geek Squad, a small residential computer services company, to revamp the chain’s in-store computer repair services. Best Buy used to send PCs to regional repair
facilities, a time-consuming process that contributed to a high degree of consumer dissatisfaction. Now about half of all repairs are made in Best Buy stores. But the real differentiator is the Geek Squad’s
ability to make house calls (at a higher fee) using its signature fleet of VW Beetles. Geek Squad employees
even dress differently for house calls—they wear a distinctive “geek” look instead of the traditional Best Buy
blue they wear at the in-store service centers.15

RETURNS A nuisance to customers, manufacturers, retailers, and distributors alike, product
returns are also an unavoidable reality of doing business, especially with online purchases.
Although the average return rate for online sales is roughly 5 percent, return and exchange policies
are estimated to serve as a deterrent for one-third to one-half of online buyers. The cost of
processing a return can be two to three times that of sending an outbound shipment, totaling an
average of $30 to $35 for items bought online.
We can think of product returns in two ways:16
•

•

Controllable returns result from problems or errors by the seller or customer and can mostly be
eliminated with improved handling or storage, better packaging, and improved transportation
and forward logistics by the seller or its supply chain partners.
Uncontrollable returns result from the need for customers to actually see, try, or experience
products in person to determine suitability and can’t be eliminated by the company in the
short run through any of these means.

| CHAPTER 12

331

332

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

One basic strategy is to eliminate the root causes of controllable returns while developing
processes for handling uncontrollable returns. The goal is to have fewer products returned and put
a higher percentage back into the distribution pipeline to be sold again.

Road Runner Sports

San Diego–based Road Runner Sports sells
running shoes, clothing, and equipment through multiple channels. The firm trains its salespeople to be as knowledgeable as possible about recommending the right products. As a result, its return rate on running shoes is 12 percent, noticeably below the industry average of
15 percent to 20 percent. Road Runner also uses SmartLabels—prepaid, preaddressed,
bar-coded return labels—to make returns quick and easy for those customers who need
them.17

Design

Road Runner Sports goes to great
lengths to minimize the number of
product returns from customers.

As competition intensifies, design offers a potent way to differentiate and position a
company’s products and services.18 Design is the totality of features that affect how
a product looks, feels, and functions to a consumer. Design offers functional and aesthetic benefits and appeals to both our rational and emotional sides.19
The designer must figure out how much to invest in form, feature development, performance, conformance, durability, reliability, repairability, and style.
To the company, a well-designed product is easy to manufacture and distribute.
To the customer, a well-designed product is a pleasant to look at and easy to
open, install, use, repair, and dispose of. The designer must take all these factors
into account.20
As holistic marketers recognize the emotional power of design and the importance to consumers of how things look and feel as well as work, design is exerting a
stronger influence in categories where it once played a smaller role. One factor fueling Hewlett-Packard’s rise in the PC market is its strong emphasis on design, forcing
Dell and others to become more style-conscious to compete. The rationale behind
this shift is clear: in one survey consumers reported they would pay an average of
$204 more for a high-end laptop that was well-designed.21
Certain companies and countries are winning on design.

Top Design Companies and Countries

Some countries have developed strong reputations for their design skills and accomplishments, such as Italy
in apparel and furniture and Scandinavia in products designed for functionality, aesthetics, and
environmental consciousness. Finland’s Nokia was the first to introduce user-changeable covers
for cell phones, the first to have elliptical-shaped, soft, and friendly forms, and the first with big
screens, all contributing to its remarkable ascent. Braun, a German division of Gillette, has elevated design to
a high art in its electric shavers, coffeemakers, hair dryers, and food processors. Kohler brought art and design to luxury kitchen and bath fixtures and faucets. The International Design and Excellence Awards (IDEA)
are given each year based on benefit to the user, benefit to the client/business, benefit to society, ecological
responsibility, appropriate aesthetics and appeal, and usability testing. In 2009, Samsung won eight awards,
Apple seven, Dell Experience Design Group six, and GE Healthcare five. One of the more successful design
companies is IDEO.22
In an increasingly visually oriented culture, transmitting brand meaning and positioning
through design is critical. “In a crowded marketplace,” writes Virginia Postrel in The Substance of
Style, “aesthetics is often the only way to make a product stand out.”23 The GM design team for the
new plug-in electric 2011 Chevy Volt wanted to make sure the car looked better than other electric
car models. As the Volt design director said, “Most electric cars are like automotive Brussels sprouts.
They’re good for you, but you don’t want to eat them.”

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

333

Bang & Olufsen’s timeless, stylish
designs command a significant
price premium in the market.

Design can shift consumer perceptions to make brand experiences more rewarding. Consider
the lengths Boeing went to in making its 777 airplane seem roomier and more comfortable. Raised
center bins, side luggage bins, divider panels, gently arched ceilings, and raised seats made the aircraft interior seem bigger. As one design engineer noted, “If we do our jobs, people don’t realize
what we have done. They just say they feel more comfortable.”
A bad design can also ruin a product’s prospects. Sony’s eVilla Internet appliance was
intended to give consumers Internet access from their kitchens. But at nearly 32 pounds and
16 inches, the mammoth product was so awkward and heavy that the owner’s manual recommended customers bend their legs, not their back, to pick it up. The product was withdrawn
after only three months.
Design should penetrate all aspects of the marketing program so that all design aspects work
together. In search of a universal identity scheme for Coca-Cola, David Butler, vice-president of
global design, established four core principles. Each design, whether of packaging, point of sale,
equipment, or any other consumer touch point, should reflect (1) bold simplicity, (2) real authenticity, (3) the power of red, and (4) a “familiar yet surprising” nature.24
Given the creative nature of design, it’s no surprise that there isn’t one widely adopted approach.
Some firms employ formal, structured processes. Design thinking is a very data-driven approach with
three phases: observation, ideation, and implementation. Design thinking requires intensive ethnographic studies of consumers, creative brainstorming sessions, and collaborative teamwork to decide
how to bring the design idea to reality. Whirlpool used design thinking to develop the Architect
Series II kitchen appliances with a more harmonized look than had existed in the category.25
On the other hand, the Danish firm Bang & Olufsen (B&O)—which has received many kudos
for the design of its stereos, TV equipment, and telephones—trusts the instincts of a handful of
designers who rarely consult with consumers. B&O does not introduce many new products in a
given year, so every new product is expected to be sold for years. Its BeoLab 8000 speakers sold for
$3,000 a pair when introduced in 1992 and for $4,500 more than 15 years later. Their designer,
David Lewis, has seen three of his most successful B&O product creations placed in the Museum of
Modern Art’s permanent collection in New York.26
Design is often an important aspect of luxury products. “Marketing Insight: Marketing Luxury
Brands” describes some of the broader marketing issues luxury brands face.

Product and Brand Relationships
Each product can be related to other products to ensure that a firm is offering and marketing the
optimal set of products.

334

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

•

Marketing Insight
Marketing Luxury Brands
Luxury products are perhaps one of the purest examples of branding,
because the brand and its image are often key competitive advantages
that create enormous value and wealth for organizations. Marketers for
luxury brands such as Prada, Gucci, Cartier, and Louis Vuitton manage
lucrative franchises that have endured for decades in what some believe
is now a $270 billion industry.
Just like marketers in less expensive and more “down-to-earth”
categories, however, those guiding the fortunes of luxury brands must
do so in a constantly evolving—and sometimes rapidly changing—
marketing environment. Globalization, new technologies, financial
crises, shifting consumer cultures, and other forces necessitate that
marketers of luxury brands be skillful and adept at their brand stewardship to succeed.
Table 12.1 summarizes some key guidelines in
marketing luxury brands.
Significantly higher priced than typical items in a category, luxury
brands for years were about social status and who a customer was—or
perhaps wanted to be. Times have changed, and especially in the face
of a crippling recession, luxury has for many become more about personal pleasure and self-expression.
The common denominators of luxury brands are quality and
uniqueness. A luxury shopper must feel that what he or she is getting is truly special. Enduring style and authenticity are often critical
to justifying a sometimes highly extravagant price. Hermès,
the French luxury leather-goods maker, sells its classic designs for
hundreds or even thousands of dollars, “not because they are in
fashion,” as one writer put it, “but [because] they never go out of
fashion.” Look at how luxury brands have been created across a
range of other categories:
•

•

Sub-Zero refrigerators. Sub-Zero sells refrigerators that

range from $1,600 for small, under-counter types to $12,000
for its specialty Pro 48 model with a stainless steel interior. The
target is home owners with high standards of performance and
design who cherish their home and what they buy to furnish it.
Sub-Zero extensively surveys this group as well as the kitchen
designers, architects, and retailers who plan for and sell their
products.
Patrón tequila. Cofounded by Paul Mitchell hair care founder
John Paul DeJoria, Patrón came about after a 1989 trip to a distillery in the small Mexican state of Jalisco. Named Patrón to convey
“the boss, the cool guy,” the smooth agave tequila comes in an elegant hand-blown decanter and is sold in individually numbered
bottles for $45 or more.

Hearts on Fire diamonds. De Beers brought branding to

diamonds decades ago, making them a symbol of love and commitment in part through its “Diamonds Are Forever” ad campaign in
1948. The marketers of Hearts of Fire diamonds have found a
market niche as the “World’s Most Perfectly Cut Diamond.”
Although diamonds have become increasingly commoditized on the
basis of the four Cs that define quality—cut, clarity, color, and
carat—Hearts on Fire have a unique “hearts and arrow” design.
When viewed magnified from the bottom, eight perfect hearts appear; from the top, eight perfect fire bursts are seen. Sold through
independent jewelers, Hearts on Fire commands a 15 percent to
20 percent premium over a comparable diamond from Tiffany & Co.
The recent economic recession challenged many luxury brands as
they tried to justify their value proposition and avoid discounting their products. Those that have successfully extended their brands vertically across a
range of price points are usually the most immune to economic downturns.
The Armani brand extended from high-end Giorgio Armani and
Giorgio Armani Privé to mid-range luxury with Emporio Armani, to affordable luxury with Armani Jeans and Armani Exchange. Clear differentiation
exists between these brands, minimizing the potential for consumer confusion and brand cannibalization. Each also lives up to the core promise
of the parent brand, reducing chances of hurting the parent’s image.
Horizontal extensions into new categories can also be tricky for luxury
brands. Even the most loyal consumer might question a $7,300
Ferragamo watch or an $85 bottle of Roberto Cavalli vodka. Jewelry
maker Bulgari has moved into hotels, fragrances, chocolate, and skin
care, prompting some branding experts to deem the brand overstretched.
In the past, iconic fashion designers Pierre Cardin and Halston
licensed their names to so many ordinary products that the brands were
badly tarnished. Ralph Lauren, however, has successfully marketed an
aspirational luxury brand with wholesome all-American lifestyle imagery
across a wide range of products. Besides clothing and fragrances,
Lauren boutiques sell linens, candles, beds, couches, dishware, photo
albums, and jewelry. Calvin Klein has adopted a similarly successful
expansive strategy, though with different lifestyle imagery.
In an increasingly wired world, some luxury marketers have struggled
to find the appropriate online selling and communication strategies for their
brand. Ultimately, success depends on getting the right balance of classic
and contemporary imagery and continuity and change in marketing programs and activities. Luxury is also not viewed in the same way everywhere.
In post-communist Russia for a time, the bigger and gaudier the logo the
better. But in the end, luxury brand marketers have to remember they are
often selling a dream, anchored in product quality, status, and prestige.
Sources: Beth Snyder Bulik, “Sub-Zero Keeps Its Cool in a Value-Obsessed
Economy,” Advertising Age, May 25, 2009, p. 14; David K. Randall, “Dandy
Corn,” Forbes, March 10, 2008, p. 70; Christopher Palmeri, “The Barroom Brawl
over Patron,” BusinessWeek, September 17, 2007, p. 72; Bethany McLean,
“Classic Rock,” Fortune, November 12, 2007, pp. 35–39; Dan Heath and Chip
Heath, “The Inevitability of $300 Socks,” Fast Company, September 2007,
pp. 68–70; Stellene Volande, “The Secret to Hermès’s Success,” Departures,
November–December 2009, pp. 110–12; Cathy Horyn, “Why So Stodgy,
Prada.com?” New York Times, December 30, 2009; Christina Binkley, “Like Our
Sunglasses? Try Our Vodka! Brand Extensions Get Weirder, Risking Customer
Confusion,” Wall Street Journal, November 8, 2007; Special Issue on Luxury
Brands, Fortune, September 17, 2007.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

TABLE 12.1

| CHAPTER 12

Guidelines for Marketing Luxury Brands

1. Maintaining a premium image for luxury brands is crucial; controlling that image is thus
a priority.
2. Luxury branding typically includes the creation of many intangible brand associations and
an aspirational image.
3. All aspects of the marketing program for luxury brands must be aligned to ensure
quality products and services and pleasurable purchase and consumption
experiences.
4. Brand elements besides brand names—logos, symbols, packaging, signage—can be important
drivers of brand equity for luxury brands.
5. Secondary associations from linked personalities, events, countries, and other entities can
be important drivers of brand equity for luxury brands.
6. Luxury brands must carefully control distribution via a selective channel strategy.
7. Luxury brands must employ a premium pricing strategy with strong quality cues and few
discounts and markdowns.
8. Brand architecture for luxury brands must be managed very carefully.
9. Competition for luxury brands must be defined broadly as it often comes from other
categories.
10. Luxury brands must legally protect all trademarks and aggressively combat
counterfeits.
Source: Based on Kevin Lane Keller, “Managing the Growth Tradeoff: Challenges and Opportunities in Luxury Branding,” Journal of Brand
Management 16 (March–May 2009), pp. 290–301.

Sub-Zero targets its high-end
refrigerators to homeowners
looking for the best.

335

336

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

The Product Hierarchy
The product hierarchy stretches from basic needs to particular items that satisfy those needs. We
can identify six levels of the product hierarchy, using life insurance as an example:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Need family—The core need that underlies the existence of a product family. Example: security.
Product family—All the product classes that can satisfy a core need with reasonable effectiveness. Example: savings and income.
Product class—A group of products within the product family recognized as having a certain
functional coherence, also known as a product category. Example: financial instruments.
Product line—A group of products within a product class that are closely related because they
perform a similar function, are sold to the same customer groups, are marketed through
the same outlets or channels, or fall within given price ranges. A product line may consist of
different brands, or a single family brand, or individual brand that has been line extended.
Example: life insurance.
Product type—A group of items within a product line that share one of several possible forms
of the product. Example: term life insurance.
Item (also called stock-keeping unit or product variant)—A distinct unit within a brand or
product line distinguishable by size, price, appearance, or some other attribute. Example:
Prudential renewable term life insurance.

Product Systems and Mixes
A product system is a group of diverse but related items that function in a compatible manner. For
example, the extensive iPod product system includes headphones and headsets, cables and docks,
armbands, cases, power and car accessories, and speakers. A product mix (also called a product
assortment) is the set of all products and items a particular seller offers for sale.
A product mix consists of various product lines. NEC’s (Japan) product mix consists of communication products and computer products. Michelin has three product lines: tires, maps, and
restaurant-rating services. At Northwestern University, separate academic deans oversee the schools
of medicine, law, business, engineering, music, speech, journalism, and liberal arts among others.
A company’s product mix has a certain width, length, depth, and consistency. These concepts
are illustrated in
Table 12.2 for selected Procter & Gamble consumer products.
•

Michelin has three distinct, but
somewhat related, product lines.

The width of a product mix refers to how many different product lines the company
carries. Table 12.2 shows a product mix width of five lines. (In fact, P&G produces many
additional lines.)

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

TABLE 12.2

| CHAPTER 12

Product Mix Width and Product Line Length for Procter & Gamble Products
(including dates of introduction)
Product Mix Width

Product
Line
Length

•

•

•

Detergents

Toothpaste

Bar Soap

Disposable Diapers

Paper Products

Ivory Snow (1930)
Dreft (1933)
Tide (1946)
Cheer (1950)
Dash (1954)
Bold (1965)
Gain (1966)
Era (1972)

Gleem (1952)
Crest (1955)

Ivory (1879)
Camay (1926)
Zest (1952)
Safeguard (1963)
Oil of Olay (1993)

Pampers (1961)
Luvs (1976)

Charmin (1928)
Puffs (1960)
Bounty (1965)

The length of a product mix refers to the total number of items in the mix. In Table 12.2, it is
20. We can also talk about the average length of a line. We obtain this by dividing the total
length (here 20) by the number of lines (here 5), for an average product line length of 4.
The depth of a product mix refers to how many variants are offered of each product in the line.
If Tide came in two scents (Mountain Spring and Regular), two formulations (liquid and powder), and two additives (with or without bleach), it would have a depth of eight because there
are eight distinct variants.27 We can calculate the average depth of P&G’s product mix by averaging the number of variants within the brand groups.
The consistency of the product mix describes how closely related the various product lines are
in end use, production requirements, distribution channels, or some other way. P&G’s product
lines are consistent in that they are consumer goods that go through the same distribution
channels. The lines are less consistent in the functions they perform for buyers.

These four product mix dimensions permit the company to expand its business in four ways. It
can add new product lines, thus widening its product mix. It can lengthen each product line. It can
add more product variants to each product and deepen its product mix. Finally, a company can
pursue more product line consistency. To make these product and brand decisions, it is useful to
conduct product line analysis.

Product Line Analysis
In offering a product line, companies normally develop a basic platform and modules that can be
added to meet different customer requirements and lower production costs. Car manufacturers
build cars around a basic platform. Homebuilders show a model home to which buyers can add additional features. Product line managers need to know the sales and profits of each item in their line
to determine which items to build, maintain, harvest, or divest.28 They also need to understand
each product line’s market profile.

SALES AND PROFITS

Figure 12.3 shows a sales and profit report for a five-item product
line. The first item accounts for 50 percent of total sales and 30 percent of total profits. The first two
items account for 80 percent of total sales and 60 percent of total profits. If these two items were
suddenly hurt by a competitor, the line’s sales and profitability could collapse. These items must be
carefully monitored and protected. At the other end, the last item delivers only 5 percent of the
product line’s sales and profits. The product line manager may consider dropping this item unless
it has strong growth potential.
Every company’s product portfolio contains products with different margins. Supermarkets make
almost no margin on bread and milk, reasonable margins on canned and frozen foods, and better
margins on flowers, ethnic food lines, and freshly baked goods. A telecommunication company makes
different margins on its core telephone service than on added services such as call waiting, caller ID,

337

338

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Percentage Contribution to
Sales and Profit

|Fig. 12.3|

Product-Item
Contributions to a
Product Line’s Total
Sales and Profits

Sales
Profits

50
40
30
20
10
0
1

2

3

4

5

Product Item

and voice mail. Companies should recognize that items can differ in their potential for being priced
higher or advertised more as ways to increase their sales, their margins, or both.29

MARKET PROFILE The product line manager must review how the line is positioned against
competitors’ lines. Consider paper company X with a paperboard product line.30 Two paperboard
attributes are weight and finish quality. Paper is usually offered at standard levels of 90, 120, 150,
and 180 weights. Finish quality is offered at low, medium, and high levels.
Figure 12.4 shows
the location of the various product line items of company X and four competitors, A, B, C, and D.
Competitor A sells two product items in the extra-high weight class ranging from medium to low
finish quality. Competitor B sells four items that vary in weight and finish quality. Competitor C
sells three items in which the greater the weight, the greater the finish quality. Competitor D sells
three items, all lightweight but varying in finish quality. Company X offers three items that vary in
weight and finish quality.
The product map shows which competitors’ items are competing against company X’s items.
For example, company X’s low-weight, medium-quality paper competes against competitor D’s
and B’s papers, but its high-weight, medium-quality paper has no direct competitor. The map also
reveals possible locations for new items. No manufacturer offers a high-weight, low-quality paper.
If company X estimates a strong unmet demand and can produce and price this paper at low cost,
it could consider adding this item to its line.
Another benefit of product mapping is that it identifies market segments. Figure 12.4 shows
the types of paper, by weight and quality, preferred by the general printing industry, the point-ofpurchase display industry, and the office supply industry. The map shows that company X is well
positioned to serve the needs of the general printing industry but less effective in serving the other
two industries.
Product line analysis provides information for two key decision areas—product line length and
product mix pricing.

|Fig. 12.4|

Source: Benson P. Shapiro, Industrial Product
Policy: Managing the Existing Product Line
(Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute
Report No. 77–110). Copyright © 2003. Reprinted
by permission of Marketing Science Institute and
Benson P. Shapiro.

High
Finish Quality

Product Map for a
Paper-Product Line

Medium

D

B

D

X

General
printing
Low

C

C

B

X

A

Office
supplies

A

Point-ofpurchase
displays

B
D

C

X

B

Low (90)

Medium (120)
Paper Weight

High (150)

Extra high (180)

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

339

Product Line Length
Company objectives influence product line length. One objective is to create a product line
to induce up-selling: Thus BMW would like to move customers up from a 3-series vehicle to a
5-series and eventually even a 7-series vehicle. A different objective is to create a product line
that facilitates cross-selling: Hewlett-Packard sells printers as well as computers. Still another
objective is to create a product line that protects against economic ups and downs: Electrolux
offers white goods such as refrigerators, dishwashers, and vacuum cleaners under different
brand names in the discount, middle-market, and premium segments, in part in case the economy moves up or down. Companies seeking high market share and market growth will generally carry longer product lines. Companies that emphasize high profitability will carry shorter
lines consisting of carefully chosen items.
Product lines tend to lengthen over time. Excess manufacturing capacity puts pressure on the
product line manager to develop new items. The sales force and distributors also pressure the company
for a more complete product line to satisfy customers. But as items are added, costs rise for design and
engineering, inventory carrying, manufacturing changeover, order processing, transportation, and
new-item promotions. Eventually, top management may stop development because of insufficient
funds or manufacturing capacity. A pattern of product line growth followed by massive pruning may
repeat itself many times. Increasingly, consumers are growing weary of dense product lines, overextended brands, and feature-laden products (see “Marketing Insight: When Less Is More”).
A company lengthens its product line in two ways: line stretching and line filling.

LINE STRETCHING Every company’s product line covers a certain part of the total possible
range. For example, Mercedes automobiles are located in the upper price range of the automobile

Marketing Insight
When Less Is More
With thousands of new products introduced each year, consumers find it
ever harder to navigate store aisles. One study found the average shopper spent 40 seconds or more in the supermarket soda aisle, compared
to 25 seconds six or seven years ago.
Although consumers may think greater product variety increases
their likelihood of finding the right product for them, the reality is often
different. One study showed that although consumers expressed
greater interest in shopping with a larger assortment of 24 flavored
jams than a smaller assortment of 6, they were 10 times more likely to
actually make a selection with the smaller assortment.
Similarly, if the product quality in an assortment is high, consumers
would actually prefer a smaller than a larger set of choices. Although
consumers with well-defined preferences may benefit from more differentiated products that offer specific benefits to better suit their needs,
too much product choice may be a source of frustration, confusion, and
regret for other consumers. Product proliferation has another downside.
Exposing the customer to constant product changes and introductions
may nudge them into reconsidering their choices and perhaps switching
to a competitor’s product.

Smart marketers realize it’s not just the product lines making consumer heads spin—many products themselves are too complicated for
the average consumer. Royal Philips Electronics asked 100 of its
top managers to take various Philips electronic products home one
weekend and see whether they could make them work. The number of
executives who returned frustrated and angry spoke volumes about the
challenges the ordinary consumer faced.
Sources: Dimitri Kuksov and J. Miguel Villas-Boas, “When More Alternatives Lead
to Less Choice,” Marketing Science, 2010, in press; Kristin Diehl and Cait Poynor,
“Great Expectations?! Assortment Size, Expectations, and Satisfaction,” Journal of
Marketing Research 46 (April 2009), pp. 312–22; Joseph P. Redden and Stephen
J. Hoch, “The Presence of Variety Reduces Perceived Quantity,” Journal of
Consumer Research 36 (October 2009), pp. 406–17; Alexander Chernev and
Ryan Hamilton, “Assortment Size and Option Attractiveness in Consumer Choice
Among Retailers,” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (June 2009), pp. 410–20;
Richard A. Briesch, Pradeep K. Chintagunta, and Edward J. Fox, “How Does
Assortment Affect Grocery Store Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (April
2009), pp. 176–89; Aner Sela, Jonah Berger, and Wendy Liu, “Variety, Vice and
Virtue: How Assortment Size Influences Option Choice,” Journal of Consumer
Research 35 (April 2009), pp. 941–51; Susan M. Broniarczyk, “Product
Assortment,” Curt P. Haugtvedt, Paul M. Herr, and Frank R. Kardes, eds.,
Handbook of Consumer Psychology (New York: Taylor & Francis, 2008),
pp. 755–79; Cassie Mogilner, Tamar Rudnick, and Sheena S. Iyengar, “The Mere
Categorization Effect: How the Presence of Categories Increases Choosers’
Perceptions of Assortment Variety and Outcome Satisfaction,” Journal of
Consumer Research 35 (August 2008), pp. 202–15; Alexander Chernev, “The Role
of Purchase Quantity in Assortment Choice: The Quantity Matching Heuristic,”
Journal of Marketing Research 45 (April 2008), pp. 171–81; John Gourville and
Dilip Soman, “Overchoice and Assortment Type: When and Why Variety Backfires,”
Marketing Science 24 (Summer 2005), pp. 382–95; Barry Schwartz, The Paradox
of Choice: Why More Is Less (New York: Harper Collins Ecco, 2004); Alexander
Chernev, “When More Is Less and Less Is More: The Role of Ideal Point Availability
and Assortment in Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research 30 (September 2003),
pp. 170–83; Sheena S. Iyengar and Mark R. Lepper, “When Choice Is
Demotivating: Can One Desire Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 79, no. 6 (December 2000), pp. 995–1006.

340

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

market. Line stretching occurs when a company lengthens its product line beyond its current
range, whether down-market, up-market, or both ways.

Down-Market Stretch A company positioned in the middle market may want to introduce a
lower-priced line for any of three reasons:
1.
2.

3.

The company may notice strong growth opportunities as mass retailers such as Walmart, Best
Buy, and others attract a growing number of shoppers who want value-priced goods.
The company may wish to tie up lower-end competitors who might otherwise try to move
up-market. If the company has been attacked by a low-end competitor, it often decides to
counterattack by entering the low end of the market.
The company may find that the middle market is stagnating or declining.
A company faces a number of naming choices in deciding to move a brand down-market:

1.
2.
3.

Use the parent brand name on all its offerings. Sony has used its name on products in a variety
of price tiers.
Introduce lower-priced offerings using a sub-brand name, such as P&G’s Charmin Basics and
Bounty Basics.
Introduce the lower-priced offerings under a different name, such as the Gap’s Old Navy
brand. This strategy is expensive to implement and means brand equity will have to be built
from scratch, but the equity of the parent brand name is protected.

Moving down-market carries risks. Kodak introduced Kodak Funtime Film to counter lowerpriced brands, but it did not price it low enough to match the lower-priced film. It also found some
of its regular customers buying Funtime, so it was cannibalizing its core brand. Kodak withdrew the
product and may have also lost some of its quality image in the process.
On the other hand, Mercedes successfully introduced its C-Class cars at $30,000 without injuring its
ability to sell other Mercedes cars for $100,000. John Deere introduced a lower-priced line of lawn tractors called Sabre from John Deere while still selling its more expensive tractors under the John Deere
name. In these cases, consumers may have been better able to compartmentalize the different brand
offerings and understand functional differences between offerings in higher and lower price tiers.

Up-Market Stretch Companies may wish to enter the high end of the market to achieve more
growth, realize higher margins, or simply position themselves as full-line manufacturers. Many
markets have spawned surprising upscale segments: Starbucks in coffee, Häagen-Dazs in ice cream,
and Evian in bottled water. The leading Japanese auto companies have each introduced an upscale
automobile: Toyota’s Lexus, Nissan’s Infiniti, and Honda’s Acura. They invented entirely new
names, because consumers might not have given the brand “permission” to stretch upward when
those lines were first introduced.
Other companies have included their own name in moving up-market. Gallo sells Gallo Family
Vineyards (priced at $10 to $30 a bottle) with a hip, young image to compete in the premium wine
segment. General Electric introduced the GE Profile brand for its large appliance offerings in the
upscale market.31 Some brands have used modifiers to signal a quality improvement, such as Ultra
Dry Pampers, Extra Strength Tylenol, and Power Pro Dustbuster Plus.
Two-Way Stretch Companies serving the middle market might stretch their line in both
directions. Robert Mondavi Winery, now owned by Constellation Brands, sells $35 bottles of wines as
the first premium “New World wine,” but it also sells $125 bottles of Mondavi Reserve at high-end
wineries, restaurants, and vineyards and through direct order, as well as $11 bottles of Woodbridge
created during the grape oversupply of the mid-1990s. Purina Dog Food has stretched up and down
to create a product line differentiated by benefits to dogs, breadth of varieties, ingredients, and price:
•
•
•
•

Pro Plan ($34.89/18 lb. bag)—helps dogs live long and healthy lives with high-quality ingredients (real meat, fish, and poultry)
Purina ONE ($29.79/18 lb. bag)—meets dogs’ changing and unique nutritional needs and
provides superpremium nutrition for good health
Purina Dog Chow ($18.49/20 lb. bag)—provides dogs with complete nutrition to build,
replenish, and repair at each life stage
Alpo by Purina ($10.99/17.6 lb. bag)—offers beef, liver, and cheese flavor combinations and
three meaty varieties

Intercontinental
Hotels Group

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

Intercontinental Hotels Group

Intercontinental Hotels
Group’s Holiday Inn brand broke its domestic hotels into four separate chains to tap into different benefit segments—the upscale Crowne Plaza, the traditional Holiday Inn, the budget
Holiday Inn Express, and the business-oriented Holiday Inn Select. Each chain received a different marketing program and emphasis. Holiday Inn Express launched the humorous “Stay
Smart” advertising campaign, showing the brilliant feats ordinary people could attempt after staying at the
chain. By developing the brands for distinct consumer targets with unique needs, Holiday Inn prevents
overlap between them.32

LINE FILLING A firm can also lengthen its product line by adding more items within the present
range. Motives for line filling include reaching for incremental profits satisfying dealers who
complain about lost sales because of items missing from the line, utilizing excess capacity, trying to
become the leading full-line company, and plugging holes to keep out competitors.

BMW AG

BMW AG

In four years BMW has morphed from a one-brand, five-model carmaker
into a powerhouse with 3 brands, 14 “Series,” and roughly 30 distinct models. Not only has the
carmaker expanded its product range downward with MINI Coopers and its compact 1-series
models, but it has also built it upward with Rolls-Royce and filled the gaps in between with its X3,
X5, and X6 sports activity vehicles, Z4 roadsters, and a 6-series coupe. The company has used
line filling successfully to boost its appeal to the rich, the super-rich, and the wannabe-rich, all without departing from its pure premium positioning. The latest challenges? Launching the 5-series Gran Turismo, which
combines the formality of a four-door sedan, the cargo capacity of a station wagon, and the high seating
position and convenient hatchback of a crossover SUV. After that, BMW still has to decide what type of
environmentally friendly “green” vehicles to introduce.33
Line filling is overdone if it results in self-cannibalization and customer confusion. The company needs to differentiate each item in the consumer’s mind with a just-noticeable difference.
According to Weber’s law, customers are more attuned to relative than to absolute difference.34
They will perceive the difference between boards 2 and 3 feet long and boards 20 and 30 feet long,
but not between boards 29 and 30 feet long. The proposed item should also meet a market need
and is not added simply to satisfy an internal need. The infamous Edsel automobile, on which Ford
lost $350 million in the late 1950s, met Ford’s internal positioning need for a car between its Ford
and Lincoln lines, but not the market’s needs.

LINE MODERNIZATION, FEATURING, AND PRUNING Product lines need to be
modernized. The question is whether to overhaul the line piecemeal or all at once. A piecemeal approach
allows the company to see how customers and dealers take to the new style. It is also less draining on the
company’s cash flow, but it lets competitors see changes and start redesigning their own lines.
In rapidly changing markets, modernization is continuous. Companies plan improvements to
encourage customer migration to higher-valued, higher-priced items. Microprocessor companies
such as Intel and AMD, and software companies such as Microsoft and Oracle continually introduce more-advanced versions of their products. It’s important to time improvements so they do
not appear too early (damaging sales of the current line) or too late (giving the competition time to
establish a strong reputation).35
The product line manager typically selects one or a few items in the line to feature. Sears will announce a special low-priced washing machine to attract customers. At other times, managers will
feature a high-end item to lend prestige to the product line. Sometimes a company finds one end of
its line selling well and the other end selling poorly.
The company may try to boost demand for slower sellers, especially if a factory is idled by lack
of demand, but it could be counterargued that the firm should promote items that sell well rather
than prop up weak ones. Nike’s Air Force 1 basketball shoe, introduced in the 1980s, is a billiondollar brand that is still a consumer and retailer favorite and a moneymaker for the company due
to collectable designs and tight supplies. Since their introduction, Air Force 1 shoes have been designed or inspired by many celebrities and athletes.36

| CHAPTER 12

341

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Nike’s classic Air Force 1 sneaker
has been refreshed time and time
again over the years, as these
25th-anniversary models show.

Using sales and cost analysis, product line managers must periodically review the line for deadwood that depresses profits.37 One
study found that for a big Dutch retailer, a major assortment reduction led to a short-term drop in category sales, caused mainly by
fewer category purchases by former buyers, but it attracted new category buyers at the same time. These new buyers partially offset the
sales losses among former buyers of the delisted items.38
In 1999, Unilever announced its “Path to Growth” program designed to get the most value from its brand portfolio by eliminating
three-quarters of its 1,600 distinct brands by 2003.39 More than
90 percent of its profits came from just 400 brands, prompting
Unilever cochairman Niall FitzGerald to liken the brand reduction
to weeding a garden, so “the light and air get in to the blooms which
are likely to grow the best.” The company retained global brands
such as Lipton, as well as regional brands and “local jewels” like
Persil, the leading detergent in the United Kingdom.
Multibrand companies all over the world try to optimize their brand portfolios. This often
means focusing on core brand growth and concentrating resources on the biggest and most established brands. Hasbro has designated a set of core toy brands, including GI Joe,
Transformers, and My Little Pony, to emphasize in its marketing. Procter & Gamble’s “back to
basics strategy” concentrated on brands with over $1 billion in revenue, such as Tide, Crest,
Pampers, and Pringles. Every product in a product line must play a role, as must any brand in
the brand portfolio.

Volkswagen

342

Volkswagen

Volkswagen has four different core brands of particular importance in its European portfolio. Initially, Audi and Seat had a sporty image and VW and
Skoda had a family-car image. Audi and VW were in a higher price-quality tier than Skoda
and Seat, which had spartan interiors and utilitarian engine performance. To reduce costs,
streamline part/systems designs, and eliminate redundancies, Volkswagen upgraded the
Seat and Skoda brands, which captured market share with splashy interiors, a full array of safety systems, and reliable power trains. The danger, of course, is that by borrowing from its upper-echelon
Audi and Volkswagen products, Volkswagen could dilute their cachet. Frugal European consumers
may convince themselves that a Seat or Skoda is almost identical to its VW sister, at several thousand
euros less.40

Product Mix Pricing
Marketers must modify their price-setting logic when the product is part of a product mix. In
product mix pricing, the firm searches for a set of prices that maximizes profits on the total mix.
Pricing is difficult because the various products have demand and cost interrelationships and are
subject to different degrees of competition. We can distinguish six situations calling for productmix pricing: product line pricing, optional-feature pricing, captive-product pricing, two-part pricing, by-product pricing, and product-bundling pricing.

PRODUCT LINE PRICING Companies normally develop product lines rather than single
products and introduce price steps. A men’s clothing store might carry men’s suits at three price
levels: $300, $600, and $900, which customers associate with low-, average-, and high-quality. The
seller’s task is to establish perceived quality differences that justify the price differences.41
OPTIONAL-FEATURE PRICING Many companies offer optional products, features, and
services with their main product. A buyer of the 2010 Subaru Outback 2.5i can order four-way
power passenger seats, an All-Weather package, and a power moon roof as optional features.
Pricing options is a sticky problem, because companies must decide which to include in the
standard price and which to offer separately. Many restaurants price their beverages high and their
food low. The food revenue covers costs, and the beverages—especially liquor—produce the profit.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

343

My Little Pony is one of Hasbro’s
core toy brands that receives
special attention and support.

This explains why servers often press hard to get customers to order drinks. Other restaurants price
their liquor low and food high to draw in a drinking crowd.

CAPTIVE-PRODUCT PRICING Some products require the use of ancillary or captive

HewlettPackard

products. Manufacturers of razors and cameras often price them low and set high markups on
razor blades and film.42 AT&T may give a cellular phone free if the person commits to buying
two years of phone service. If the captive product is priced too high in the aftermarket,
however, counterfeiting and substitutions can erode sales. Consumers now can buy cartridge
refills for their printers from discount suppliers and save 20 percent to 30 percent off the
manufacturer’s price.

Hewlett-Packard In 1996, Hewlett-Packard (HP) began drastically cutting

prices on its printers, by as much as 60 percent in some cases. HP could afford to make these
cuts because customers typically spend twice as much on replacement ink cartridges, toner, and
specialty paper as on the printer over the life of the product, and inkjet supplies typically carry
45 percent to 60 percent profit margins. As the price of printers dropped, printer sales rose, and
so did aftermarket sales. HP now owns about 46 percent of the worldwide printer business, a share that
accounted for 32 percent of HP’s $13.4 billion profit in 2008.43

TWO-PART PRICING Service firms engage in two-part pricing, consisting of a fixed fee plus
a variable usage fee. Cell phone users pay a minimum monthly fee plus charges for calls that exceed
their allotted minutes. Amusement parks charge an admission fee plus fees for rides over a certain
minimum. The service firm faces a problem similar to captive-product pricing—namely, how
much to charge for the basic service and how much for the variable usage. The fixed fee should be
low enough to induce purchase; profit can then come from the usage fees.
BY-PRODUCT PRICING The production of certain goods—meats, petroleum products, and
other chemicals—often results in by-products that should be priced on their value. Any income
earned on the by-products will make it easier for the company to charge a lower price on its main
product if competition forces it to do so. Formed in 1855, Australia’s CSR was originally named
Colonial Sugar Refinery and forged its early reputation as a sugar company. The company began to
sell by-products of its sugar cane: waste sugar cane fiber was used to manufacture wallboard. Today,

344

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

through product development and acquisition, the renamed CSR has become one of the top
10 companies in Australia selling building and construction materials.

PRODUCT-BUNDLING PRICING Sellers often bundle products and features. Pure
bundling occurs when a firm offers its products only as a bundle. A talent agency might insist that
a “hot” actor can be signed to a film only if the film company also accepts other talents the agency
represented (directors, writers). This is a form of tied-in sales.
In mixed bundling, the seller offers goods both individually and in bundles, normally charging
less for the bundle than if the items were purchased separately. An auto manufacturer might offer
an option package at less than the cost of buying all the options separately. A theater will price a
season subscription lower than the cost of buying all the performances separately. Customers may
not have planned to buy all the components, so savings on the price bundle must be enough to induce them to buy it.44
Some customers want less than the whole bundle in exchange for a lower price.45 These customers
ask the seller to “unbundle” or “rebundle” its offer. If a supplier saves $100 by not supplying unwanted
delivery and reduces the customer’s price by $80, it has kept the customer happy while increasing its
profit by $20. “Marketing Memo: Product-Bundle Pricing Considerations” offers a few tips.

Co-Branding and Ingredient Branding
CO-BRANDING Marketers often combine their products with products from other companies
in various ways. In co-branding—also called dual branding or brand bundling—two or more wellknown brands are combined into a joint product or marketed together in some fashion.46
One form of co-branding is same-company co-branding, as when General Mills advertises Trix
cereal and Yoplait yogurt. Another form is joint-venture co-branding, such as General Electric
and Hitachi lightbulbs in Japan, and the Citibank AAdvantage credit card. There is multiple-sponsor
co-branding, such as Taligent, a one-time technological alliance of Apple, IBM, and Motorola.47
Finally, there is retail co-branding in which two retail establishments use the same location to
optimize space and profits, such as jointly owned Pizza Hut, KFC, and Taco Bell restaurants.

marketing

Memo

Product-Bundle Pricing Considerations

As promotional activity increases on individual items in the bundle, buyers
perceive less savings on the bundle and are less apt to pay for it. Research
suggests the following guidelines for implementing a bundling strategy:

• Don’t promote individual products in a package as frequently and
cheaply as the bundle. The bundle price should be much lower than
the sum of individual products or the consumer will not perceive its
attractiveness.

price of individual products as an external reference for the bundle,
which then loses value.

• Consider how experienced and knowledgeable your customer is. More
knowledgeable customers may be less likely to need or want bundled
offerings and prefer the freedom to choose components individually.

• Remember costs play a role. If marginal costs for the products are

individual products. Another option: alternate promotions, one after another, to avoid running conflicting promotions.

low—such as for proprietary software components that can be easily
copied and distributed—a bundling strategy can be preferable to
a pure component strategy where each component is purchased
separately.

• If you offer large rebates on individual products, make them the absolute

• Firms with single-products bundling products together to compete

exception and do it with discretion. Otherwise, the consumer uses the

against a multiproduct firm may not be successful if a price war ensues.

• Limit promotions to a single item in the mix if you still want to promote

Sources: Amiya Basu and Padmal Vitharana, “Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy,” Marketing Science 28 (July–August 2009), pp. 792–801;
Bikram Ghosh and Subramanian Balachnadar, “Competitive Bundling and Counterbundling with Generalist and Specialist Firms,” Management Science 53 (January 2007),
pp. 159–68; Loren M. Hitt and Pei-yu Chen, “Bundling with Customer Self-Selection: A Simple Approach to Bundling Low-Marginal-Cost Goods,” Management Science 51
(October 2005), pp. 1481–93; George Wuebker, “Bundles Effectiveness Often Undermined,” Marketing News, March 18, 2002, pp. 9–12; Stefan Stremersch and Gerard J.
Tellis, “Strategic Bundling of Products and Prices,” Journal of Marketing 66 (January 2002), pp. 55–72.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

345

The main advantage of co-branding is that a product can be convincingly positioned by virtue
of the multiple brands. Co-branding can generate greater sales from the existing market and open
opportunities for new consumers and channels. It can also reduce the cost of product introduction,
because it combines two well-known images and speeds adoption. And co-branding may be a valuable means to learn about consumers and how other companies approach them. Companies in the
automotive industry have reaped all these benefits.
The potential disadvantages of co-branding are the risks and lack of control in becoming
aligned with another brand in consumers’ minds. Consumer expectations of co-brands are likely to
be high, so unsatisfactory performance could have negative repercussions for both brands. If the
other brand enters a number of co-branding arrangements, overexposure may dilute the transfer of
any association. It may also result in a lack of focus on existing brands. Consumers may feel less
sure of what they know about the brand.48
For co-branding to succeed, the two brands must separately have brand equity—adequate
brand awareness and a sufficiently positive brand image. The most important requirement is a
logical fit between the two brands, to maximize the advantages of each while minimizing disadvantages. Consumers are more apt to perceive co-brands favorably if they are complementary and offer unique quality, rather than overly similar and redundant.49
Managers must enter co-branding ventures carefully, looking for the right fit in values,
capabilities, and goals and an appropriate balance of brand equity. There must be detailed plans to
legalize contracts, make financial arrangements, and coordinate marketing programs. As one executive at Nabisco put it, “Giving away your brand is a lot like giving away your child—you want
to make sure everything is perfect.” Financial arrangements between brands vary; one common
approach is for the brand more deeply invested in the production process to pay the other a licensing fee and royalty.
Brand alliances require a number of decisions.50 What capabilities do you not have? What
resource constraints do you face (people, time, money)? What are your growth goals or revenue
needs? Ask whether the opportunity is a profitable business venture. How does it help maintain or
strengthen brand equity? Is there any risk of diluting brand equity? Does the opportunity offer
extrinsic advantages such as learning opportunities?

INGREDIENT BRANDING Ingredient branding is a special case of co-branding.51 It creates
brand equity for materials, components, or parts that are necessarily contained within other
branded products. Successful ingredient brands include Dolby noise reduction technology, GORETEX water-resistant fibers, and Scotchgard fabrics. Some popular ingredient-branded products are
Lunchables lunch combinations with Taco Bell tacos and Lay’s potato chips made with KC
Masterpiece barbecue sauce.
An interesting take on ingredient branding is “self-branded ingredients” that companies advertise and even trademark. Westin Hotels advertises its own “Heavenly Bed” and “Heavenly
Shower.” The Heavenly Bed has been so successful that Westin now sells the bed, pillows, sheets,
and blankets via an online catalog, along with other “Heavenly” gifts, bath products, and even pet items. If it can be done well, using self-branded ingredients
makes sense because firms have more control over them and can develop them to
suit their purposes.52
Ingredient brands try to create enough awareness and preference for their product so consumers will not buy a “host” product that doesn’t contain it.53 DuPont has
done so successfully.

DuPont

DuPont has introduced a number of innovative products,
such as Corian® solid-surface material, for use in markets ranging from
apparel to aerospace. Many, such as Tyvek® house wrap, Teflon® non-stick
coating, and Kevlar® fiber, became household names as ingredient brands
in consumer products manufactured by other companies. Since 2004,
DuPont has introduced more than 5,000 new products and received over 2,400 new
patents. One of its recent award winners, Sorona® is a renewably sourced or bio-based
polymer for use in carpet and apparel markets.54

DuPont’s Stainmaster carpets have
become a household name.

346

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Many manufacturers make components or materials that enter final branded products but
lose their individual identity. One of the few companies that avoided this fate is Intel.
Intel’s consumer-directed brand campaign convinced many personal computer buyers to buy
only brands with “Intel Inside.” As a result, major PC manufacturers—IBM, Dell, Compaq—
purchase their chips from Intel at a premium price rather than buy equivalent chips from an
unknown supplier.
What are the requirements for successful ingredient branding?55
1.
2.
3.

4.

Consumers must believe the ingredient matters to the performance and success of the end
product. Ideally, this intrinsic value is easily seen or experienced.
Consumers must be convinced that not all ingredient brands are the same and that the ingredient is superior.
A distinctive symbol or logo must clearly signal that the host product contains the ingredient.
Ideally, this symbol or logo functions like a “seal” and is simple and versatile, credibly communicating quality and confidence.
A coordinated “pull” and “push” program must help consumers understand the advantages of
the branded ingredient. Channel members must offer full support such as consumer advertising and promotions and—sometimes in collaboration with manufacturers—retail merchandising and promotion programs.

Packaging, Labeling, Warranties,
and Guarantees
Some product packages—such as the Coke bottle and Red Bull can—are world famous. Many
marketers have called packaging a fifth P, along with price, product, place, and promotion.
Most, however, treat packaging and labeling as an element of product strategy. Warranties
and guarantees can also be an important part of the product strategy and often appear on the
package.

Packaging
Packaging includes all the activities of designing and producing the container for a product.
Packages might have up to three layers. Cool Water cologne comes in a bottle (primary package) in
a cardboard box (secondary package) in a corrugated box (shipping package) containing six dozen
bottles in cardboard boxes.
The package is the buyer’s first encounter with the product. A good package draws the consumer
in and encourages product choice. In effect, they can act as “five-second commercials” for the product. Packaging also affects consumers’ later product experiences when they go to open the package
and use the product at home. Some packages can even be attractively displayed at home. Distinctive
packaging like that for Kiwi shoe polish, Altoids mints, and Absolut vodka is an important part of a
brand’s equity.56
Various factors contribute to the growing use of packaging as a marketing tool:
•

•
•

•

Self-service. An increasing number of products are sold on a self-serve basis. In an average supermarket, which may stock 15,000 items, the typical shopper passes some 300 products per
minute. Given that 50 percent to 70 percent of all purchases are made in the store, the effective
package must perform many sales tasks: attract attention, describe the product’s features, create consumer confidence, and make a favorable overall impression.
Consumer affluence. Rising affluence means consumers are willing to pay a little more for the
convenience, appearance, dependability, and prestige of better packages.
Company and brand image. Packages contribute to instant recognition of the company or
brand. In the store, they can create a billboard effect, such as Garnier Fructis with its bright
green packaging in the hair care aisle.
Innovation opportunity. Unique or innovative packaging such as resealable spouts can bring
big benefits to consumers and profits to producers.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

347

Packaging must achieve a number of objectives:57
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Identify the brand.
Convey descriptive and persuasive information.
Facilitate product transportation and protection.
Assist at-home storage.
Aid product consumption.

To achieve these objectives and satisfy consumers’ desires, marketers must choose the
aesthetic and functional components of packaging correctly. Aesthetic considerations relate to a package’s size and shape, material, color, text, and graphics. There are a number of
factors and criteria in each area.
Color is a particularly important aspect of packaging and carries different meanings
in different cultures and market segments.
Table 12.3 summarizes the beliefs of
some visual marketing experts about its role.
Kiwi’s distinctive packaging, name,
and logo are all brand assets.

TABLE 12.3

The Color Wheel of Branding and Packaging

Red is a powerful color, symbolizing energy, passion or even danger. Red works best for action-oriented products or brands, products associated with speed or power, or dominant or iconic brands.
Orange often connotes adventure and fun. Like red, it’s an attention-grabber and is thought to stimulate appetites, but it’s less aggressive than red can be. Orange has been used to convey value and
discounts, and recently has earned young, stylish associations thanks to the fashion industry.
Yellow is equated with sunny warmth and cheeriness. Its more vibrant shades elicit feelings of wellbeing and are said to stimulate mental activity, so yellow is often associated with wisdom and intellect. Yellow works well for products or brands tied to sports or social activities, or for products or content looking to garner attention.
Green connotes cleanliness, freshness and renewal—and, of course, environmental friendliness—
but experts warn that green now is overused in the marketplace. It is one of the most predominant,
naturally occurring colors, so it often is associated with wholesome attributes. It works well for organic or recycled products, or for brands associated with health and wellness.
Blue, another naturally predominant color, is regularly associated with security, efficiency, productivity
and a clearness of mind. It has become a popular color in the corporate world and particularly in the
high-tech industry. Blue also symbolizes cleanliness, openness and relaxation, and works well for
everything from cleaning and personal care products to spas and vacation destinations.
Purple, for centuries, has symbolized nobility and wealth, and those associations hold true today.
Purple is a powerful color for luxury brands and products, or for companies that want to lend an air
of mystery or uniqueness to their wares. Purple is particularly popular with females of all ages.
Pink is a stereotypically girly color associated with frilliness and warmth, and is considered to have soft,
peaceful, comforting qualities. Pink works well for personal care products and baby-related brands. Pink
also is associated with sweetness and works well for food marketers touting sugary treats.
Brown is a strong, earthy color that connotes honesty and dependability. Brown often is cited as a
favorite color among men. Its darker shades are rich and solid, while other shades work well as a
foundational color. Brown often works best in conjunction with other colors
Black is classic and strong, and is a regular fixture in marketers’ color schemes as either a primary
component or an accent color for font or graphics. Black can convey power, luxury, sophistication
and authority, and can be used to market everything from cars and electronics to high-end hotels and
financial services.
White, the color of puffy clouds and fresh snow, logically connotes purity and cleanliness. It often is
used as a background or accent color to brighten a color scheme, but also it can be used liberally to
create clean associations for organic foods or personal care products. White also can symbolize innovation and modernity.
Source: Elisabeth Sullivan, “Color Me Profitable,” Marketing News, October 15, 2008, p. 8. Reprinted with permission from Marketing News,
published by the American Marketing Association.

348

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Tropicana

Functionally, structural design is crucial. The packaging elements must harmonize with each
other and with pricing, advertising, and other parts of the marketing program.
Packaging updates or redesigns can occur frequently to make the brand more contemporary,
relevant, or practical. Although these can have immediate impact on sales, they also can have a
downside, as PepsiCo learned for its Tropicana brand.

Tropicana PepsiCo experienced great success with its Tropicana brand, acquired

in 1998. Then in 2009, the company launched a redesigned package to “refresh and modernize” the brand. The goal was to create an “emotional attachment by ‘heroing’ the juice and
trumpeting the natural fruit goodness.” Arnell Group led the extreme makeover that led to an
entirely new look, downplaying the brand name, raising the prominence of the phrase
“100 percent orange pure & natural,” and replacing the “straw in an orange” graphic on the front of the
package with a close-up of a glass of orange juice. Consumer response was swift and negative. The package looked “ugly” or “stupid,” and some even confused it with a store brand. Sales dropped 20 percent.
After only two months, PepsiCo management announced it would revert to the old packaging.58
After the company designs its packaging, it must test it. Engineering tests ensure that the package
stands up under normal conditions; visual tests, that the script is legible and the colors harmonious;
dealer tests, that dealers find the packages attractive and easy to handle; and consumer tests, that
buyers will respond favorably. Eye tracking by hidden cameras can assess how much consumers notice and examine packages. For Comtrex cold medicine, tracking research was able to confirm that
only 50 percent of consumers considered the old package on the shelf, versus 62 percent for a newly
redesigned package.59
Although developing effective packaging may require several months and several hundred thousand dollars, companies must consider growing environmental and safety concerns about reducing
packaging. Fortunately, many companies have gone “green” and are finding creative new ways to develop packaging. Frito-Lay’s Sun Chips multigrain snacks, containing 30 percent less fat than potato
chips, are positioned as a healthier,“good for you” snack option. Part of the firm’s effort to also support
a “healthier planet” was to unveil a fully compostable bag made from plant-based materials (although
later withdrawn for some flavors when consumers complained of the noise the bags made) and to run
its factory in Modesto on solar power.
Marketers must balance competing
demands in their packaging; Sun
Chips’ environmentally friendly
packaging was cut back shortly after its launch because many consumers complained about how
noisy the bags were.

Labeling
The label can be a simple attached tag or an elaborately designed graphic that is part of the
package. It might carry a great deal of information, or only the brand name. Even if the seller
prefers a simple label, the law may require more.
A label performs several functions. First, it identifies the product or brand—for instance,
the name Sunkist stamped on oranges. It might also grade the
product; canned peaches are grade-labeled A, B, and C. The label
might describe the product: who made it, where and when, what it
contains, how it is to be used, and how to use it safely. Finally, the
label might promote the product through attractive graphics.
Advanced technology allows 360-degree shrink-wrapped labels to
surround containers with bright graphics and accommodate more
product information, replacing glued-on paper labels.60
Labels eventually need freshening up. The label on Ivory soap has
been redone at least 18 times since the 1890s, with gradual changes
in the size and design of the letters. As Tropicana found out, companies with labels that have become icons need to tread very carefully
when initiating a redesign to preserve key branding elements.
A long history of legal concerns surrounds labels, as well as
packaging. In 1914, the Federal Trade Commission Act held that
false, misleading, or deceptive labels or packages constitute unfair

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

| CHAPTER 12

349

competition. The Fair Packaging and Labeling Act, passed by Congress in 1967, set mandatory
labeling requirements, encouraged voluntary industry packaging standards, and allowed federal
agencies to set packaging regulations in specific industries.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required processed-food producers to include
nutritional labeling that clearly states the amounts of protein, fat, carbohydrates, and calories contained in products, as well as vitamin and mineral content as a percentage of the recommended
daily allowance.61 The FDA has also taken action against potentially misleading uses of such
descriptions as “light,” “high fiber,” and “low fat.”

Warranties and Guarantees
All sellers are legally responsible for fulfilling a buyer’s normal or reasonable expectations.
Warranties are formal statements of expected product performance by the manufacturer.
Products under warranty can be returned to the manufacturer or designated repair center
for repair, replacement, or refund. Whether expressed or implied, warranties are legally
enforceable.
Extended warranties and service contracts can be extremely lucrative for manufacturers
and retailers. Analysts estimate that warranty sales have accounted for a large percentage
of Best Buy’s operating profits.62 Despite evidence that extended warranties do not pay off,
some consumers value the peace of mind.63 These warranties still generate multibillion dollars
in revenue for electronic goods in the United States, though the total has declined as consumers have become more comfortable seeking solutions to technical problems online or from
friends.64
Many sellers offer either general or specific guarantees.65 A company such as Procter & Gamble
promises general or complete satisfaction without being more specific—”If you are not satisfied for
any reason, return for replacement, exchange, or refund.” A. T. Cross guarantees its Cross pens and
pencils for life. The customer mails the pen to A. T. Cross (mailers are provided at stores), and the
pen is repaired or replaced at no charge.
Guarantees reduce the buyer’s perceived risk. They suggest that the product is of high quality
and the company and its service performance are dependable. They can be especially helpful when
the company or product is not well known or when the product’s quality is superior to that of competitors. Hyundai’s and Kia’s highly successful 10-year or 100,000 mile power train warranty
programs were designed in part to assure potential buyers of the quality of the products and the
companies’ stability.

Summary
1. Product is the first and most important element of the
marketing mix. Product strategy calls for making coordinated decisions on product mixes, product lines,
brands, and packaging and labeling.
2. In planning its market offering, the marketer needs to
think through the five levels of the product: the core
benefit, the basic product, the expected product, the
augmented product, and the potential product, which
encompasses all the augmentations and transformations the product might ultimately undergo.
3. Products can be nondurable goods, durable goods,
or services. In the consumer-goods category are convenience goods (staples, impulse goods, emergency
goods), shopping goods (homogeneous and heterogeneous), specialty goods, and unsought goods. The

industrial-goods category has three subcategories:
materials and parts (raw materials and manufactured
materials and parts), capital items (installations and
equipment), and supplies and business services (operating supplies, maintenance and repair items, maintenance and repair services, and business advisory
services).
4. Brands can be differentiated on the basis of product
form, features, performance, conformance, durability,
reliability, repairability, style, and design, as well as such
service dimensions as ordering ease, delivery, installation, customer training, customer consulting, and maintenance and repair.
5. Design is the totality of features that affect how a product
looks, feels, and functions. A well-designed product offers

350

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

functional and aesthetic benefits to consumers and can
be an important source of differentiation.
6. Most companies sell more than one product. A product mix can be classified according to width, length,
depth, and consistency. These four dimensions are
the tools for developing the company’s marketing
strategy and deciding which product lines to grow,
maintain, harvest, and divest. To analyze a product
line and decide how many resources to invest in it,
product line managers need to look at sales and profits and market profile.
7. A company can change the product component of its
marketing mix by lengthening its product via line

stretching (down-market, up-market, or both) or line filling, by modernizing its products, by featuring certain
products, and by pruning its products to eliminate the
least profitable.
8. Brands are often sold or marketed jointly with other
brands. Ingredient brands and co-brands can add
value, assuming they have equity and are perceived as
fitting appropriately.
9. Physical products must be packaged and labeled. Welldesigned packages can create convenience value for
customers and promotional value for producers.
Warranties and guarantees can offer further assurance
to consumers.

Applications
Marketing Debate
With Products, Is It Form or Function?

Marketing Discussion
Product & Service Differentiation

The “form versus function” debate applies in many arenas,
including marketing. Some marketers believe product performance is the be-all and end-all. Other marketers maintain
that the look, feel, and other design elements of products
are what really make the difference.

Consider the different means of differentiating products and
services. Which ones have the most impact on your
choices? Why? Can you think of certain brands that excel
on a number of these different means of differentiation?

Take a position: Product functionality is the key
to brand success versus Product design is the key to
brand success.

Marketing Excellence

>>Caterpillar

Caterpillar was founded in 1925 when two Californiabased tractor companies merged. The name “Caterpillar,”
however, dates back to the early 1900s when Benjamin
Holt, one of the company’s founders, designed a tractor
crawler with wide, thick tracks instead of wheels. These
tracks prevented the machine from sinking into California’s
deep, rich soil, which was impassable when wet. The new
farm tractor crept along the farmland in such a way that
one observer said it “crawled like a caterpillar.”
Holt sold the tractor under the Caterpillar brand, and
once the merger occurred, the newly formed company
became Caterpillar Tractor Company. Since then, Caterpillar
Inc., or CAT, has grown into the largest manufacturer of
earth-moving equipment and engines in the world. With over
300 different machines for sale, Caterpillar offers product
solutions for eight industries: residential, nonresidential, industrial, infrastructure, mining and quarrying, energy, waste,
and forestry. Its distinctive yellow machines are found all
over the globe and have helped make the brand a U.S. icon.

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

So how did a small tractor company grow to become
one of the biggest companies in the world? The company
grew steadily at first, hitting a few critical milestones including the use of Caterpillar’s trademark farm treads on
Army tanks in WWI and WWII. Huge postwar construction
and strong overseas demand kept sales strong through
the mid-21st century, as did innovations like the diesel
tractor and rubber-tired tractors.
Things changed, however, when the recession of the
early 1980s hit Caterpillar hard and international competitors gained market share, including Japan’s Komatsu.
Caterpillar’s high prices and inflexible bureaucracy nearly
sent the company into bankruptcy. In 1982 alone, the
firm lost $6.5 billion, laid off thousands of employees,
closed several factories, and suffered a long United Auto
Workers strike.
In the 1990s, Caterpillar recognized that it desperately
needed to change, and under new leadership it successfully pulled off one of the biggest turnarounds in corporate
history. Several factors played a role.
Caterpillar boldly fought the United Auto Workers
and outlasted two strikes and seven years of disagreements.
•
It decentralized and restructured into several business units, each responsible for its own P&L.
•
It invested a significant amount of money (ultimately
$1.8 billion) in a factory-modernizing program that automated and streamlined its manufacturing process with a
combination of just-in-time inventory and flexible manufacturing. By automating its manufacturing system, the
company became more efficient and competitive, although it also was forced to lay off more of its workforce.
•
It made research and development one of its biggest
priorities, investing hundreds of millions of dollars in
new technologies, products, and machines. As a result, CAT construction trucks became more hightech, competitive, and environmentally friendly.
Today, Caterpillar ranks number one or number two in
every industry it serves. Its products are unmatched in
quality and reliability and the company has maintained its
strong focus on innovation. With a $2 billion annual research and development budget, new products are
launched every year. Recent innovations include hybrid
diesel-electric tractors—the first of their kind—and loweremission engines with ACERT technology, a clean-diesel
technology that also improves fuel efficiency.
Caterpillar’s product range is immense. From a small
47 horsepower skid steer to an 850 horsepower tractor to
a massive 3,370 horsepower mining truck, the firm develops products that serve each market and region’s specific
needs. In China, for example, a critical market to the
future of Caterpillar, the company has divided its product
strategy into three segments: World Class, Mid-Tier, and
•

| CHAPTER 12

351

Low-End. Caterpillar is focused on innovating high-tech
machinery for the growing World Class segment and leaving the Low-End segment to local competitors that will
eventually be consolidated.
Another reason for Caterpillar’s dominance in the market is its business model. Caterpillar sells it all: machines,
services, and support for a wide range of industries. Fiftythree percent of its sales come from products and the rest
from integrated services. Caterpillar accomplishes this feat
through its extensive Global Dealer Network—specially
trained independent CAT dealers who can provide services
on a local basis, giving the global company a personal feel.
Feeling local is important considering that 56 percent of
Caterpillar’s business comes from overseas, making it one
of the United States’ biggest exporters. Caterpillar has been
a leader in building roads, bridges, highways, and airports
all over the world. In developing cities like Antamin, Peru, for
example, which is abundant in copper, large mining companies spend hundreds of millions of dollars on CAT machinery and services each year. Up to 50 different kinds of CAT
bulldozers, front loaders, excavators, and special mining
trucks help clear roads, clean up spills, and dig for copper.
These massive trucks are all manufactured in Decatur,
Illinois, shipped in pieces, and assembled at the job site.
Caterpillar’s sales hit $51 billion in 2008 and dropped
to $32 billion in 2009 due to the recession. Japan’s
Komatsu remains a distant number two, with less than
half the sales of Caterpillar. Caterpillar maintains 50 production facilities in the United States and 60 overseas,
selling products in over 200 countries.
What’s next for Caterpillar? As the company moves
forward, it remains focused on reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in its machinery, innovating more green technologies, maintaining its strong brand, and investing in the
future of emerging countries like India and China. The
company believes that in order to grow, it must be successful in emerging markets.
Questions
1. What were some of the key steps that led to
Caterpillar’s becoming the industry leader in earthmoving machinery?
2. Discuss Caterpillar’s future. What should it do next
with its product line? Where is the future growth for
this company?
Sources: Green Rankings, The 2009 List,” Newsweek, http://greenrankings.newsweek.com; Tim
McKeough, “The Caterpillar Self-Driving Dump Truck,” Fast Company, December 1, 2008; Alex
Taylor III, “Caterpillar: Big Trucks, Big Sales, Big Attitude,” Fortune, August 13, 2007; Tudor Van
Hampton, “A New Heavyweight Among Hybrids,” New York Times, January 21, 2010; Steven
Pearlstein, “After Caterpillar’s Turnaround, A Chance to Reinvent Globalization,” Washington Post,
April 19, 2006; Dale Buss, “CAT Is Back: An Icon That Once Seemed Headed for the Dustbin,
Caterpillar Has Made an Impressive Turnaround. Here’s How,” Chief Executive, July 2005; Jessie
Scanlon, “Caterpillar Rolls Out Its Hybrid D7E Tractor,” BusinessWeek, July 20, 2009; Caterpillar,
Inc. supporting materials at CLSA Asia USA Forum; www.cat.com.

352

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Marketing Excellence

>>Toyota

In 1936, Toyota admitted following Chrysler’s landmark
Airflow and patterning its engine after a 1933 Chevrolet
engine. But by 2000, when it introduced the first hybrid
electric-gasoline car, the Prius, Toyota was the leader. In
2002, when the second-generation Prius hit showrooms,
dealers received 10,000 orders before the car was even
available. GM followed with an announcement that it would
enter the hybrid market with models of its own.
Toyota offers a full line of cars for the U.S. market,
from family sedans and sport utility vehicles to trucks and
minivans. It has products for different price points, from
lower-cost Scions to mid-priced Camrys to the luxury
Lexus. Designing these different products means listening
to different customers, building the cars they want, and
then crafting marketing to reinforce each make’s image.
After four years of carefully listening to teens, for instance, Toyota learned that the Scion’s target age group
of 16- to 21-year-olds wanted personalization. So it builds
the car “mono-spec” at the factory, with just one wellequipped trim level, and lets customers choose from over
40 customization elements at dealerships, from stereo
components to wheels and even floor mats. Toyota markets the Scion at music events and has showrooms
where “young people feel comfortable hanging out and
not a place where they just go stare at a car,” said Scion
Vice President Jim Letz.
In contrast, the tagline for the Lexus global strategy is
“Passionate Pursuit of Perfection.” Dealerships offer
white-glove treatment, though Toyota understands that
each country defines perfection differently. In the United
States, perfection and luxury mean comfort, size, and
dependability. In Europe, luxury means attention to detail
and brand heritage. Thus, although Toyota maintains a
consistent Lexus visual vocabulary, logo, font, and overall
communication, the advertising varies by country.

Another big reason behind Toyota’s success is its
manufacturing. The firm is the master of lean manufacturing and continuous improvement. Its plants can make as
many as eight different models at the same time, bringing
huge increases in productivity and market responsiveness. And Toyota relentlessly innovates. A typical Toyota
assembly line makes thousands of operational changes in
the course of a single year. Toyota employees see their
purpose as threefold: making cars, making cars better,
and teaching everyone how to make cars better. The
company encourages problem solving, always looking to
improve the process by which it improves all other
processes.
Toyota is integrating its assembly plants around the
world into a single giant network. The plants will customize cars for local markets and shift production quickly
to satisfy any surges in demand from markets worldwide.
With a manufacturing network, Toyota can build a wide
variety of models much more inexpensively. That means it
will be able to fill market niches as they emerge without
building whole new assembly operations. “If there’s a
market or market segment where they aren’t present,
they go there,” said Tatsuo Yoshida, auto analyst at
Deutsche Securities Ltd. And with consumers increasingly fickle about what they want in a car, such market
agility gives Toyota a huge competitive edge.
In 2006, Toyota earned over $11 billion—more than
all other major automakers combined. In 2007, it edged
past General Motors to become the world’s largest carmaker. And, in 2008, it manufactured 9.2 million vehicles,
1 million more than GM and almost 3 million more than
Volkswagen.
Over the years, Toyota’s automobiles have consistently ranked high in quality and reliability. That all changed
in 2009 and 2010, however, when Toyota experienced a
massive recall of over 8 million of its vehicles. A variety of
problems ranging from sticking accelerator pedals to
sudden acceleration to software glitches in the braking
system affected many Toyota brands, including Lexus,
Prius, Camry, Corolla, and Tundra.
Not only had these mechanical defects caused
numerous crashes, they were linked to the deaths of over
50 people. Toyota’s President Akio Toyoda testified before Congress and offered an explanation of what went
wrong: “We pursued growth over the speed at which we
were able to develop our people and our organization. I
regret that this has resulted in the safety issues described
in the recalls we face today, and I am deeply sorry for any
accidents that Toyota drivers have experienced.”
Analysts estimated the worldwide recall will cost
Toyota $2 billion to $6 billion including repair costs, legal
settlements, and lost sales. Market share dropped
4 percent in the first three months of the recall and was
expected to drop even further as problems continued to

SETTING PRODUCT STRATEGY

unfold. Hoping to bring consumers back to the Toyota
brand, the company offered incentives such as two
years of free maintenance and zero-percent financing.
While Toyota rides the recall storm of 2010 and faces
some challenging times, it can be comforted by the fact
that it continues to lead the industry in a wide range of areas including lean manufacturing and environmentally
friendly technologies.
Questions
1. Toyota has built a huge manufacturing company that
can produce millions of cars each year for a wide variety
of consumers. Why was it able to grow so much bigger
than any other auto manufacturer?

| CHAPTER 12

353

2. Has Toyota done the right thing by manufacturing a
car brand for everyone? Why or why not?
3. Did Toyota grow too quickly as Toyoda suggested?
What should the company do over the next year,
5 years, and 10 years? How can growing companies
avoid quality problems in the future?
Sources: Martin Zimmerman, “Toyota’s First Quarter Global Sales Beat GM’s Preliminary
Numbers,” Los Angeles Times, April 24, 2007; Charles Fishman, “No Satisfaction at Toyota,” Fast
Company, December 2006–January 2007, pp. 82–90; Stuart F. Brown, “Toyota’s Global Body
Shop,” Fortune, February 9, 2004, p. 120; James B. Treece, “Ford Down; Toyota Aims for No. 1,”
Automotive News, February 2, 2004, p. 1; Brian Bemner and Chester Dawson, “Can Anything Stop
Toyota?” BusinessWeek, November 17, 2003, pp. 114–22; Tomoko A. Hosaka, “Toyota Counts
Rising Costs of Recall Woes,” Associated Press, March 16, 2010; “World Motor Vehicle Production
by Manufacturer,” OICA, July 2009; Chris Isidore, “Toyota Recall Costs: $2 billion,”
http://money.cnn.com, February 4, 2010; www.toyota.com.

354

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How do we define and classify
services, and how do they differ
from goods?
2. What are the new services
realities?
3. How can we achieve excellence
in services marketing?
4. How can we improve service
quality?
5. How can goods marketers
improve customer-support
services?

The unconventional Cirque du Soleil
organization creates memorable
experiences for its audiences through its
creative redefinition of the circus concept.

13

Designing and
Managing Services
As product companies find it harder and harder to differentiate their physical
products, they turn to service differentiation. Many in fact find significant profitability in delivering
superior service, whether that means on-time delivery, better and faster answering of inquiries, or
quicker resolution of complaints. Top service providers know these advantages well and also how to
create memorable customer experiences.1

In its 25-year history, Cirque du Soleil (French for “circus of the sun”) has continually broken loose from circus convention. It takes traditional ingredients such as trapeze artists,
clowns, muscle men, and contortionists and places them in a nontraditional setting with
lavish costumes, new age music, and spectacular stage designs. And it eliminates other
commonly observed circus elements—there are no animals. Each production is loosely
tied together with a theme such as “a tribute to the nomadic soul” (Varekai) or “a phantasmagoria of
urban life” (Saltimbanco). The group has grown from its Quebec street-performance roots to become
a half-billion-dollar global enterprise, with 3,000 employees on four continents entertaining audiences
of millions annually.
Part of its success comes from a company culture that encourages artistic creativity and innovation
and carefully safeguards the brand. One new production is created each year—always in-house—
and is unique: There are no duplicate touring companies. In addition to Cirque’s mix of media and local
promotion, an extensive interactive e-mail program to its million-plus-member Cirque Club creates an
online community of fans—20 percent to 30 percent of all ticket sales
come from club members. Generating $800 million in revenue annually, Because it is critical to understand the special nature of
the Cirque du Soleil brand has expanded to encompass a record label, a services and what that means to marketers, in this chapter we
retail operation, and resident productions in Las Vegas (five in all), systematically analyze services and how to market them most
Orlando, Tokyo, and other cities.2
effectively.

The Nature of Services
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that the service-producing sector will continue to be the
dominant employment generator in the economy, adding about 14.6 million jobs through 2018, or
96 percent of the expected increase in total employment. By 2018, the goods-producing sector is
expected to account for 12.9 percent of total jobs, down from 17.3 percent in 1998 and 14.2 percent
in 2008. Manufacturing lost 4.1 million jobs from 1998 through 2008 and is expected to lose another 1.2 million jobs between 2008 and 2018.3 These numbers and others have led to a growing interest in the special problems of marketing services.4

355

356

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Service Industries Are Everywhere
The government sector, with its courts, employment services, hospitals, loan agencies, military
services, police and fire departments, postal service, regulatory agencies, and schools, is in the
service business. The private nonprofit sector—museums, charities, churches, colleges, foundations,
and hospitals—is in the service business. A good part of the business sector, with its airlines, banks,
hotels, insurance companies, law firms, management consulting firms, medical practices, motion
picture companies, plumbing repair companies, and real estate firms, is in the service business.
Many workers in the manufacturing sector, such as computer operators, accountants, and legal staff,
are really service providers. In fact, they make up a “service factory” providing services to the
“goods factory.” And those in the retail sector, such as cashiers, clerks, salespeople, and customer
service representatives, are also providing a service.
A service is any act or performance one party can offer to another that is essentially intangible
and does not result in the ownership of anything. Its production may or may not be tied to a physical product. Increasingly, manufacturers, distributors, and retailers are providing value-added
services, or simply excellent customer service, to differentiate themselves. Many pure service firms
are now using the Internet to reach customers; some are purely online. Monster.com’s Webbyaward-winning site offers online career advice and employment recruiting. Done right, improvements or innovations in customer service can have a big payoff, as Zipcar found.

Zipcar Car sharing started in Europe as a means to extend public transportation. In

Zipcar offers its fast-growing customer base a practical, environmentally friendly alternative to car
ownership.

the United States the appeal of Zipcar, the market leader and pioneer, is both environmental
and economic. With a $50 membership fee and rates that total less than $100 a day—which
includes gas, insurance, and parking—a typical family could save $3,000 to $4,000 a year
by substituting Zipcar use for car ownership. Zipcar’s fleet includes all types of popular
models—BMWs, Volvos, pickup trucks, and even MINI Coopers and the Toyota Prius hybrid—and the
firm estimates that every car it adds keeps up to 20 private cars off the road. Consumers—and an
increasing number of universities and businesses—book online and use a sophisticated reservation system to reserve a specific car in their neighborhood. There are a
number of rules for car care (such as no smoking) and logistics
(such as calling to extend a reservation if running late). As CEO
Scott Griffith states, “Our business model depends on the kindness of others.” To help increase awareness, Zipcar slaps its
logo on the side of all but the high-end luxury models. Unusual
marketing stunts such as a contest to guess how many
Swedish meatballs had been stuffed into a MINI Cooper parked
in an IKEA parking lot also help to spread the word. Targeting
major cities and college towns, the company is growing about
30 percent a year.5

Categories of Service Mix
The service component can be a minor or a major part of
the total offering. We distinguish five categories of offerings:
1.
2.

3.

Pure tangible good—a tangible good such as soap,
toothpaste, or salt with no accompanying services.
Tangible good with accompanying services—a tangible
good, like a car, computer, or cell phone, accompanied
by one or more services. Typically, the more technologically advanced the product, the greater the need for
high-quality supporting services.
Hybrid—an offering, like a restaurant meal, of equal
parts goods and services. People patronize restaurants
for both the food and its preparation.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

4.

5.

| CHAPTER 13

357

Major service with accompanying minor goods and services—a major service, like air travel,
with additional services or supporting goods such as snacks and drinks. This offering requires
a capital-intensive good—an airplane—for its realization, but the primary item is a service.
Pure service—primarily an intangible service, such as babysitting, psychotherapy, or massage.
The range of service offerings makes it difficult to generalize without a few further distinctions.

•

•
•

•
•

Services vary as to whether they are equipment based (automated car washes, vending machines) or people based (window washing, accounting services). People-based services vary by
whether unskilled, skilled, or professional workers provide them.
Service companies can choose among different processes to deliver their service. Restaurants
offer cafeteria-style, fast-food, buffet, and candlelight service formats.
Some services need the client’s presence. Brain surgery requires the client’s presence, a car
repair does not. If the client must be present, the service provider must be considerate of his or
her needs. Thus beauty salon operators will invest in décor, play background music, and
engage in light conversation with the client.
Services may meet a personal need (personal services) or a business need (business services).
Service providers typically develop different marketing programs for these markets.
Service providers differ in their objectives (profit or nonprofit) and ownership (private or
public). These two characteristics, when crossed, produce four quite different types of organizations. The marketing programs of a private investor hospital will differ from those of a
private charity hospital or a Veterans Administration hospital.6

Customers typically cannot judge the technical quality of some services even after they have
received them.
Figure 13.1 shows various products and services according to difficulty of
evaluation.7 At the left are goods high in search qualities—that is, characteristics the buyer can
evaluate before purchase. In the middle are goods and services high in experience qualities—
characteristics the buyer can evaluate after purchase. At the right are goods and services high
in credence qualities—characteristics the buyer normally finds hard to evaluate even after
consumption.8
Because services are generally high in experience and credence qualities, there is more risk in
their purchase, with several consequences. First, service consumers generally rely on word of
mouth rather than advertising. Second, they rely heavily on price, provider, and physical cues to
judge quality. Third, they are highly loyal to service providers who satisfy them. Fourth, because
switching costs are high, consumer inertia can make it challenging to entice business away from
a competitor.

|Fig. 13.1|

High in Search
Qualities

High in Experience
Qualities

Medical diagnosis

Auto repair

Root canal

Legal services

Television repair

Child care

Haircuts

Most services

Vacation

Restaurant meals

Automobiles

Houses

Furniture

Jewelry

Easy to
Evaluate

Clothing

Most goods

Continuum of
Evaluation for
Different Types of
Products

High in Credence
Qualities

Difficult
to Evaluate

Source: Valarie A. Zeithaml, “How Consumer
Evaluation Processes Differ between Goods and
Services,” James H. Donnelly and William R. George,
eds., Marketing of Services (Chicago: American
Marketing Association, 1981). Reprinted with permission of the American Marketing Association.

358

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Distinctive Characteristics of Services
Four distinctive service characteristics greatly affect the design of marketing programs:
intangibility, inseparability, variability, and perishability.9

INTANGIBILITY Unlike physical products, services cannot be seen, tasted, felt, heard, or
smelled before they are bought. A person getting cosmetic surgery cannot see the results before the
purchase, and the patient in the psychiatrist’s office cannot know the exact outcome of treatment.
To reduce uncertainty, buyers will look for evidence of quality by drawing inferences from the
place, people, equipment, communication material, symbols, and price. Therefore, the service
provider’s task is to “manage the evidence,” to “tangibilize the intangible.”10
Service companies can try to demonstrate their service quality through physical evidence and
presentation.11 Suppose a bank wants to position itself as the “fast” bank. It could make this positioning strategy tangible through any number of marketing tools:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Place—The exterior and interior should have clean lines. The layout of the desks and the traffic flow should be planned carefully. Waiting lines should not get overly long.
People—Employees should be busy, but there should be a sufficient number to manage the
workload.
Equipment—Computers, copy machines, desks, and ATMs should look like, and be, state of
the art.
Communication material—Printed materials—text and photos—should suggest efficiency
and speed.
Symbols—The bank’s name and symbol could suggest fast service.
Price—The bank could advertise that it will deposit $5 in the account of any customer who
waits in line more than five minutes.

Service marketers must be able to transform intangible services into concrete benefits and a
well-defined experience.12 Disney is a master at “tangibilizing the intangible” and creating magical
fantasies in its theme parks; so are companies such as Jamba Juice and Barnes & Noble in their
respective retail stores.13
Table 13.1 measures brand experiences in general along sensory,
affective, behavioral, and intellectual dimensions. Applications to services are clear.

TABLE 13.1

Dimensions of Brand Experience

Sensory
• This brand makes a strong impression on my visual sense or other senses.
• I find this brand interesting in a sensory way.
• This brand does not appeal to my senses.
Affective
• This brand induces feelings and sentiments.
• I do not have strong emotions for this brand.
• This brand is an emotional brand.
Behavioral
• I engage in physical actions and behaviors when I use this brand.
• This brand results in bodily experiences.
• This brand is not action-oriented.
Intellectual
• I engage in a lot of thinking when I encounter this brand.
• This brand does not make me think.
• This brand stimulates my curiosity and problem solving.
Source: Jos̆ko Brakus, Bernd H. Schmitt, and Lia Zarantonello, “Brand Experience: What Is It? How Is It Measured? Does It Affect Loyalty?” Journal
of Marketing 73 (May 2009), pp. 52–68. Reprinted with permission from Journal of Marketing, published by the American Marketing Association.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

Because there is no physical product, the service provider’s facilities—its primary and secondary
signage, environmental design and reception area, employee apparel, collateral material, and so
on—are especially important. All aspects of the service delivery process can be branded, which is
why Allied Van Lines is concerned about the appearance of its drivers and laborers, why UPS has
developed such strong equity with its brown trucks, and why Hilton’s Doubletree Hotels offers
fresh-baked chocolate chip cookies to symbolize care and friendliness.14
Service providers often choose brand elements—logos, symbols, characters, and slogans—to
make the service and its key benefits more tangible—for example, the “friendly skies” of United, the
“good hands” of Allstate, and the “bullish” nature of Merrill Lynch.

INSEPARABILITY Whereas physical goods are manufactured, then inventoried, then distributed,
and later consumed, services are typically produced and consumed simultaneously.15 A haircut can’t
be stored—or produced without the barber. The provider is part of the service. Because the client is
also often present, provider–client interaction is a special feature of services marketing. Buyers of
entertainment and professional services are very interested in the specific provider. It’s not the same
concert if Taylor Swift is indisposed and replaced by Beyoncé, or if a corporate legal defense is
supplied by an intern because antitrust expert David Boies is unavailable. When clients have strong
provider preferences, the provider can raise its price to ration its limited time.
Several strategies exist for getting around the limitations of inseparability. The service provider
can work with larger groups. Some psychotherapists have moved from one-on-one therapy to
small-group therapy to groups of over 300 people in a large hotel ballroom. The service provider
can work faster—the psychotherapist can spend 30 more efficient minutes with each patient instead of 50 less-structured minutes and thus see more patients. The service organization can train
more service providers and build up client confidence, as H&R Block has done with its national
network of trained tax consultants.

VARIABILITY Because the quality of services depends on who provides them, when and where,
and to whom, services are highly variable. Some doctors have an excellent bedside manner; others
are less empathic.

A different entertainer creates a different concert experience—a Beyoncé concert is not the same
as a Taylor Swift concert.

| CHAPTER 13

359

360

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Service buyers are aware of this variability and often talk to others before selecting a service
provider. To reassure customers, some firms offer service guarantees that may reduce consumer perceptions of risk.16 Here are three steps service firms can take to increase quality control.
1.

2.

3.

Invest in good hiring and training procedures. Recruiting the right employees and providing
them with excellent training is crucial, regardless of whether employees are highly skilled professionals or low-skilled workers. Better-trained personnel exhibit six characteristics: Competence,
courtesy, credibility, reliability, responsiveness, and communication.17 Given the diverse nature
of its customer base in California, banking and mortgage giant Wells Fargo actively seeks and
trains a diverse workforce. The average Wells Fargo customer uses 5.2 different bank products,
roughly twice the industry average, thanks in part to the teamwork of its highly motivated staff.18
Standardize the service-performance process throughout the organization. A service blueprint can map out the service process, the points of customer contact, and the evidence of
service from the customer’s point of view.19
Figure 13.2 shows a service blueprint for a
guest spending a night at a hotel.20 Behind the scenes, the hotel must skillfully help the guest
move from one step to the next. Service blueprints can be helpful in developing new service,
supporting a zero-defects culture, and devising service recovery strategies.
Monitor customer satisfaction. Employ suggestion and complaint systems, customer surveys,
and comparison shopping. Customer needs may vary in different areas, allowing firms to develop region-specific customer satisfaction programs.21 Firms can also develop customer information databases and systems for more personalized service, especially online.22

Because services are a subjective experience, service firms can also design marketing communication and information programs so consumers learn more about the brand than what they get
from service encounters alone.

Hotel Exterior
Parking
Arrive at
Hotel

Cart for
Bags
Give Bags
to Bellperson

Desk
Registration
Papers
Lobby
Key
Check In

Elevators
Hallways
Room
Go to Room

Care for
Bags
Receive
Bags

Room
Amenities
Bath
Sleep
Shower

Menu
Call Room
Service

Delivery
Tray
Food
Appearance

Bill
Desk
Lobby
Hotel Exterior
Parking

Food

Receive
Food

Eat

Check Out
and Leave

Line of Interaction
Greet and
Take Bags

Process
Registration

Deliver
Food

Deliver
Bags

Process
Check Out

Line of Visibility
Take Bags
to Room

Take
Food Order

Line of Internal Interaction
Registration
System

Prepare
Food

|Fig. 13.2|

Blueprint for Overnight Hotel Stay
Source: Valarie Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and Dwayne D. Gremler, Services Marketing: Integrating Customer Focus across the Firm, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).

Registration
System

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

361

PERISHABILITY Services cannot be stored, so their perishability can be a problem
when demand fluctuates. Public transportation companies must own much more
equipment because of rush-hour demand than if demand were even throughout the
day. Some doctors charge patients for missed appointments because the service value
(the doctor’s availability) exists only at the time of the appointment.
Demand or yield management is critical—the right services must be available to
the right customers at the right places at the right times and right prices to maximize
profitability. Several strategies can produce a better match between service demand
and supply.23 On the demand side:
•

•
•
•

Differential pricing will shift some demand from peak to off-peak periods.
Examples include low matinee movie prices and weekend discounts for car
rentals.24
Nonpeak demand can be cultivated. McDonald’s pushes breakfast service, and
hotels promote minivacation weekends.
Complementary services can provide alternatives to waiting customers, such as
cocktail lounges in restaurants and automated teller machines in banks.
Reservation systems are a way to manage the demand level. Airlines, hotels,
and physicians employ them extensively.
On the supply side:

•
•
•
•
•

Part-time employees can serve peak demand. Colleges add part-time teachers when enrollment goes up; stores hire extra clerks during holiday periods.
Peak-time efficiency routines can allow employees to perform only essential tasks during
peak periods. Paramedics assist physicians during busy periods.
Increased consumer participation frees service providers’ time. Consumers fill out their own
medical records or bag their own groceries.
Shared services can improve offerings. Several hospitals can share medical-equipment purchases.
Facilities for future expansion can be a good investment. An amusement park buys surrounding land for later development.

Many airlines, hotels, and resorts e-mail short-term discounts and special promotions to self-selected
customers. After 40 years of making people stand in line at its theme parks, Disney instituted FASTPASS,
which allows visitors to reserve a spot in line and eliminate the wait. Polls revealed 95 percent like the
change. Disney’s vice president, Dale Stafford, told a reporter, “We have been teaching people how to
stand in line since 1955, and now we are telling them they don’t have to. Of all the things we can do and
all the marvels we can create with the attractions, this is something that will have a profound effect on
the entire industry.”25

The New Services Realities
Service firms once lagged behind manufacturers in their use of marketing because they were small,
or they were professional businesses that did not use marketing, or they faced large demand or little competition. This has certainly changed. Some of the most skilled marketers now are service
firms. One that wins praise for its marketing success is Singapore Airlines.

Singapore Airlines (SIA)

Singapore Airlines is consistently recognized as the world’s “best” airline—it wins so many awards, it has to update its Web site
monthly to keep up to date—in large part due to its stellar holistic marketing. Famous for
pampering passengers, SIA continually strives to create a “wow effect” and surpass customers’ expectations. It was the first to launch individual video screens at airplane seats.
Thanks to the first-of-its-kind $1 million simulator SIA built to mimic the air pressure and humidity inside
a plane, the carrier found that taste buds change in the air and that, among other things, it needed to cut
back on spices in its food. SIA places a high value on training; its “Transforming Customer Service (TCS)”
program includes staff in five key operational areas: cabin crew, engineering, ground services, flight operations, and sales support. The TCS culture is also embedded in all management training, company-wide. It

Disney’s innovative FASTPASS
system helps to match supply and
demand for its Disney World
theme park rides.

362

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

applies a 40-30-30 rule in its holistic approach to people, processes, and
products: 40 percent of resources go to training and invigorating staff,
30 percent to reviewing process and procedures, and 30 percent to creating
new product and service ideas. With its innovatively designed Boeing
777-300 ERS and Airbus A380 planes, SIA set new standards of comforts
in all classes of service, from eight private minirooms in first class to
wider seats, AC power supplies, and USB ports in coach.26

A Shifting Customer Relationship

Singapore Airlines goes to extraordinary lengths to ensure that
every aspect of the passenger
experience exceeds expectations.

Customer service dissatisfaction
increasingly goes viral—Canadian
singer Dave Carroll’s musical frustration with United Airlines was
downloaded by millions.

Not all companies, however, have invested in providing superior
service, at least not to all customers. In many service industries,
such as airlines, banks, stores, and hotels, customer satisfaction in
the United States has not significantly improved—or in some cases
actually dropped—in recent years.27 Customers complain about
inaccurate information; unresponsive, rude, or poorly trained workers; and long wait times.
Even worse, many find their complaints never actually reach a live human being because of slow
or faulty phone or online reporting systems.
It doesn’t have to be that way. Fifty-five operators handle 100,000 calls a year on Butterball
Turkeys’ 800 number—10,000 on Thanksgiving Day alone—about how to prepare, cook, and serve
turkeys. Trained at Butterball University, the operators have all cooked turkeys dozens of different
ways and can handle the myriad queries that come their way, including why customers shouldn’t
stash turkeys in snow banks or thaw them in bathtubs.28
Savvy services marketers are recognizing the new services realities, such as the importance of the
newly empowered customer, customer coproduction, and the need to engage employees as well as
customers.

CUSTOMER EMPOWERMENT Customers are becoming more sophisticated about
buying product-support services and are pressing for “ unbundled services.” They may desire
separate prices for each service element and the right to select the elements they want.
Customers also increasingly dislike having to deal with a multitude of service providers
handling different types of equipment. Some third-party service organizations now service a
greater range of equipment.
Most importantly, the Internet has empowered customers by letting them vent
their rage about bad service—or reward good service—and send their comments
around the world with a mouse click. Although a person who has a good customer experience is more likely to talk about it, someone who has a bad experience will talk to
more people.29 Ninety percent of angry customers reported sharing their story with a
friend. Now, they can share their stories with strangers too. At PlanetFeedback.com,
shoppers can send a complaint, compliment, suggestion, or question directly to a
company, with the option to post comments publicly on the site as well.

United Breaks Guitars When Canadian singer Dave
Carroll faced $1,200 in damages to his $3,000 Gibson guitar after a United
flight, he put his creative energy to good use. He created a humorous video,
United Breaks Guitars, and launched it on YouTube with this catchy refrain:
“United, you broke my Taylor guitar. United, some big help you are. You broke it, you
should fix it. You’re liable, just admit it. I should have flown with someone else or
gone by car ’cuz United breaks guitars.”
Viewed over 5 million times, his follow-up video focused on his frustrating efforts to get United
to pay for the damage. United got the message. It donated a check for $1,200 to a charity
Carroll designated and now uses the incident in training baggage handlers and customerservice representatives.30

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

363

Most companies respond quickly. Comcast allows contact 24/7 by phone and e-chat but also
reaches out to customers and monitors blogs, Web sites, and social media. If employees see a customer report a problem on a blog, they get in touch and offer help. E-mail responses to customers
must be implemented properly to be effective. One expert believes companies should (1) send an
automated reply to tell customers when a more complete answer will arrive (ideally within
24 hours), (2) ensure the subject line always contains the company name, (3) make the message
easy to scan for relevant information, and (4) give customers an easy way to respond with followup questions.31
More important than simply responding to a disgruntled customer, however, is preventing
dissatisfaction from occurring in the future. That may mean simply taking the time to nurture
customer relationships and give customers attention from a real person. Columbia Records spent
$10 million to improve its call center, and customers who phone the company can now opt out to
reach an operator at any point in their call. JetBlue took a service disaster and used it to improve its
customer service approach.

JetBlue CEO David Neeleman set the bar high for responding to enraged customers
after the company’s drastic Valentine’s Day failure of 2007. During storms in New York City,
JetBlue left hundreds of passengers stranded aboard grounded aircraft—some for longer than
9 hours without amenities—and cancelled more than 1,000 flights. JetBlue had built its reputation on being a more responsive, humane airline in an era of minimal services and maximal delays.
Neeleman knew he had to act fast to stem another kind of storm: a whirlwind of customer defections. Within
24 hours, he had placed full-page ads in newspapers nationwide in which he personally responded to JetBlue’s
debacle. “We are sorry and embarrassed,” the ads declared, “But
most of all we are deeply sorry.” JetBlue gave concrete reparations to passengers. Neeleman announced a new “customer bill
of rights” that promised passengers travel credits for excessive
waits. For instance, passengers who are unable to disembark
from an arriving flight for 3 hours or more would receive vouchers
worth the full value of their round-trip ticket. JetBlue will also hand
out vouchers for the full amount of passengers’ round trips if a
flight is cancelled within 12 hours of a scheduled departure. The
apology, backed by concrete benefits for the angry and inconvenienced passengers, netted kudos for the company from both the
business press and JetBlue’s own true blue customers. Neeleman
eventually stepped down as new management was brought in to
address some of the growth challenges the airline faced.32

CUSTOMER COPRODUCTION The reality is that
customers do not merely purchase and use a service; they
play an active role in its delivery.33 Their words and actions
affect the quality of their service experiences and those of
others, and the productivity of frontline employees.
Customers often feel they derive more value, and feel a
stronger connection to the service provider, if they are actively involved in the service process. This coproduction
can put stress on employees, however, and reduce their
satisfaction, especially if they differ culturally or in other
ways from customers.34 Moreover, one study estimated
that one-third of all service problems are caused by the
customer.35 The growing shift to self-service technologies
will likely increase this percentage.
Preventing service failures is crucial, since recovery
is always challenging. One of the biggest problems is
attribution—customers often feel the firm is at fault or,
even if not, that it is still responsible for righting any

JetBlue weathered a customer
service disaster and continues to
receive kudos from its passengers.

364

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

wrongs. Unfortunately, although many firms have well-designed and executed procedures to deal
with their own failures, they find managing customer failures—when a service problem arises from
a customer’s lack of understanding or ineptitude—much more difficult.
Figure 13.3 displays
the four broad causes of customer failures. Solutions come in all forms, as these examples show:36
1.

2.

3.

4.

Redesign processes and redefine customer roles to simplify service encounters. One of the
keys to Netflix’s success is that it charges a flat fee and allows customers to return DVDs by
mail at their leisure, giving customers greater control and flexibility.
Incorporate the right technology to aid employees and customers. Comcast, the largest cable
operator by subscribers in the United States, introduced software to identify network glitches
before they affected service and to better inform call-center operators about customer
problems. Repeat service calls dropped 30 percent as a result.
Create high-performance customers by enhancing their role clarity, motivation, and
ability. USAA reminds enlisted policyholders to suspend their car insurance when they are
stationed overseas.
Encourage “customer citizenship” so customers help customers. At golf courses, players
can not only follow the rules by playing and behaving appropriately, they can encourage
others to do so.

SATISFYING EMPLOYEES AS WELL AS CUSTOMERS Excellent service companies know
that positive employee attitudes will promote stronger customer loyalty.37 Instilling a strong customer
orientation in employees can also increase their job satisfaction and commitment, especially if they
have high customer contact. Employees thrive in customer-contact positions when they have an
internal drive to (1) pamper customers, (2) accurately read customer needs, (3) develop a personal
relationship with customers, and (4) deliver quality service to solve customers’ problems.38
Consistent with this reasoning, Sears found a high correlation between customer satisfaction,
employee satisfaction, and store profitability. In companies such as Hallmark, John Deere, and Four
Seasons Hotels, employees exhibit real company pride. The downside of not treating employees
right is significant. A survey of 10,000 employees from the largest 1,000 companies found that
40 percent of workers cited “lack of recognition” as a key reason for leaving a job.39
Given the importance of positive employee attitudes to customer satisfaction, service companies must attract the best employees they can find. They need to market a career rather than just
a job. They must design a sound training program and provide support and rewards for good
performance. They can use the intranet, internal newsletters, daily reminders, and employee
roundtables to reinforce customer-centered attitudes. Finally, they must audit employee job
satisfaction regularly.

|Fig. 13.3|
Communication

Communication
Fit

Skill

Skill

Attitude and Effort

Complexity

s

le

Ease of Use

Role Clarity

Support

Training

Training

Employees

se

op
Pe

Role Clarity

es
oc

Attitude and Effort

Pr

Source: Stephen Tax, Mark Colgate, and David
Bowen, MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring
2006): pp. 30–38. ©2006 by Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. All rights reserved. Distributed
by Tribune Media Services.

Customers

Fit

Identified Customer Failure

Ease of Use

Spatial Layout
Ambient Conditions

rv

ice

sc

log
ch

Signs, Symbols and Other Objects

Se

Reliability

no

Functionality
Accessibility

ap

y

e

Availability of Support

Te

Root Causes of
Customer Failure

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

365

The Panda Express restaurant chain has management turnover that’s half the industry average,
due in part to a combination of ample bonuses and health benefits with a strong emphasis on
worker self-improvement through meditation, education, and hobbies. Special wellness seminars
and get-to-know-you events outside work help to create a caring, nurturing atmosphere.40

Achieving Excellence
in Services Marketing
The increased importance of the service industry has sharpened the focus on what it takes to excel
in the marketing of services.41 Here are some guidelines.

Marketing Excellence
Marketing excellence with services requires excellence in three broad areas: external, internal, and
interactive marketing (see
Figure 13.4).42
•
•

•

External marketing describes the normal work of preparing, pricing, distributing, and promoting the service to customers.
Internal marketing describes training and motivating employees to serve customers well. The
most important contribution the marketing department can make is arguably to be “exceptionally
clever in getting everyone else in the organization to practice marketing.”43
Interactive marketing describes the employees’ skill in serving the client. Clients judge service
not only by its technical quality (Was the surgery successful?), but also by its functional quality
(Did the surgeon show concern and inspire confidence?).44

Charles
Schwab

A good example of a service company achieving marketing excellence is Charles Schwab.

Charles Schwab Charles Schwab, one of the nation’s largest discount broker-

age houses, uses the telephone, Internet, and wireless devices to create an innovative combination of high-tech and high-touch services. One of the first major brokerage houses to provide
online trading, Schwab today services more than 8 million individual and institutional accounts. It
offers account information and proprietary research from retail brokers, real-time quotes, an afterhours trading program, the Schwab learning center, live events, online chats with customer service representatives, a global investing service, and market updates delivered by e-mail. Besides the discount brokerage, the
firm offers mutual funds, annuities, bond trading, and now mortgages through its Charles Schwab Bank.
Schwab’s success has been driven by its efforts to lead in three areas: superior service (online, via phone, and
in local branch offices), innovative products, and low prices. Daily customer feedback reports are reviewed and
acted on the next day. If customers have trouble filling out a form or experience an unexpected delay, a Schwab
representative calls to ask about the source of the problem and how it can be solved.45
Company

|Fig. 13.4|

Internal
Marketing

Three Types of
Marketing in Service
Industries

External
Marketing

$
Cleaning/ Financial/
maintenance banking
services
services
Employees

Interactive
Marketing

Restaurant
industry

Customers

366

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

In interactive marketing, teamwork is often key, and delegating authority to frontline employees
can allow for greater service flexibility and adaptability through better problem solving, closer employee cooperation, and more efficient knowledge transfer.46
Technology also has great power to make service workers more productive. When US Airways
deployed handheld scanners to better track baggage in 2008, mishandled baggage decreased almost
50 percent from the year before. The new technology paid for itself in the first year and helped contribute to a 35 percent drop in complaints.47
Sometimes new technology has unanticipated benefits. When BMW introduced Wi-Fi to its
dealerships to help customers pass the time more productively while their cars were being serviced, more customers chose to stay rather than use loaner cars, an expensive item for dealers to
maintain.48
Companies must avoid pushing productivity so hard, however, that they reduce perceived quality. Some methods lead to too much standardization. Service providers must deliver “high touch” as
well as “high tech.” Amazon.com has some of the most amazing technological innovations in online
retailing, but it also keeps customers extremely satisfied when a problem arises even if they don’t
actually talk to an Amazon.com employee.49
The Internet lets firms improve their service offerings and strengthen their relationships
with customers by allowing for true interactivity, customer-specific and situational personalization, and real-time adjustments of the firm’s offerings.50 But as companies collect, store,
and use more information about customers, they have also raised concerns about security and
privacy.51 Companies must incorporate the proper safeguards and reassure customers about
their efforts.

Best Practices of Top Service Companies
In achieving marketing excellence with their customers, well-managed service companies share a
strategic concept, a history of top-management commitment to quality, high standards, profit tiers,
and systems for monitoring service performance and customer complaints.

STRATEGIC CONCEPT Top service companies are “customer obsessed.” They have a
clear sense of their target customers and their needs and have developed a distinctive strategy
for satisfying these needs. At the Four Seasons luxury hotel chain, employees must pass four
interviews before being hired. Each hotel also employs a “guest historian” to track guest
preferences. With more branch offices in the United States than Starbucks has, Edward Jones
brokerage stays close to customers by assigning a single financial advisor and one
administrator to each office. Although costly, maintaining such small teams fosters personal
relationships.52

TOP-MANAGEMENT COMMITMENT Companies such as Marriott, Disney, and USAA
have a thorough commitment to service quality. Their managements look monthly not only at
financial performance, but also at service performance. Ray Kroc of McDonald’s insisted on
continually measuring each McDonald’s outlet on its conformance to QSCV: quality, service,
cleanliness, and value. Some companies insert a reminder along with employees’ paychecks:
“Brought to you by the customer.” Sam Walton of Walmart required the following employee
pledge: “I solemnly swear and declare that every customer that comes within 10 feet of me, I will
smile, look them in the eye, and greet them, so help me Sam.”

HIGH STANDARDS The best service providers set high quality standards. Citibank aims to
answer phone calls within 10 seconds and customer letters within 2 days. The standards must be set
appropriately high. A 98 percent accuracy standard may sound good, but it would result in 64,000
lost FedEx packages a day; 6 misspelled words on each page of a book; 400,000 incorrectly filled
prescriptions daily; 3 million lost USPS mail pieces each day; no phone/Internet/electricity 8 days
per year or 29 minutes per day; 1,000 mislabeled or (mispriced) products at a supermarket; and
6 million people unaccounted for in a U.S. census.
PROFIT TIERS Firms have decided to raise fees and lower services to those customers who barely
pay their way, and to coddle big spenders to retain their patronage as long as possible. Customers in
high-profit tiers get special discounts, promotional offers, and lots of special service; customers in

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

lower-profit tiers may get more fees, stripped-down service, and voice messages to process their
inquiries.
When the recent recession hit, Zappos decided to stop offering complimentary overnight shipping
to first-time buyers and offer it to repeat buyers only. The money saved was invested in a new VIP
service for the company’s most loyal customers.53 Companies that provide differentiated levels of
service must be careful about claiming superior service, however—customers who receive lesser treatment will bad-mouth the company and injure its reputation. Delivering services that maximize both
customer satisfaction and company profitability can be challenging.

MONITORING SYSTEMS Top firms audit service performance, both their own and
competitors’, on a regular basis. They collect voice of the customer (VOC) measurements to probe
customer satisfiers and dissatisfiers. They use comparison shopping, mystery or ghost shopping,
customer surveys, suggestion and complaint forms, service-audit teams, and customers’ letters to
the president.
We can judge services on customer importance and company performance. Importance-performance
analysis rates the various elements of the service bundle and identifies required actions.
Table 13.2
shows how customers rated 14 service elements or attributes of an automobile dealer’s service
department on importance and performance. For example,“Job done right the first time” (attribute 1)
received a mean importance rating of 3.83 and a mean performance rating of 2.63, indicating that
customers felt it was highly important but not performed well. The ratings of the 14 elements are
divided into four sections in
Figure 13.5.
•

Quadrant A in the figure shows important service elements that are not being performed at
the desired levels; they include elements 1, 2, and 9. The dealer should concentrate on improving the service department’s performance on these elements.

TABLE 13.2

Customer Importance and Performance Ratings for an
Auto Dealership

Attribute Description

Mean
Importance
Ratinga

Mean
Performance
Ratingb

1

Job done right the first time

3.83

2.63

2

Fast action on complaints

3.63

2.73

3

Prompt warranty work

3.60

3.15

4

Able to do any job needed

3.56

3.00

5

Service available when needed

3.41

3.05

6

Courteous and friendly service

3.41

3.29

7

Car ready when promised

3.38

3.03

8

Perform only necessary work

3.37

3.11

9

Low prices on service

3.29

2.00

10

Clean up after service work

3.27

3.02

11

Convenient to home

2.52

2.25

12

Convenient to work

2.43

2.49

13

Courtesy buses and cars

2.37

2.35

14

Send out maintenance notices

2.05

3.33

Number
Attribute

a
Ratings obtained from a four-point scale of “extremely important” (4), “important” (3), “slightly important” (2), and “not important” (1).
b
Ratings obtained from a four-point scale of “excellent” (4), “good” (3), “fair” (2), and “poor” (1). A “no basis for judgment”
category was also provided.

| CHAPTER 13

367

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Extremely Important

|Fig. 13.5|

A. Concentrate here

ImportancePerformance Analysis

B. Keep up the good work
1
2

3

4

5
6

Fair Performance

7
8

9
10

11
12

Excellent Performance

368

13
14

C. Low priority

D. Possible overkill

Slightly Important

•
•
•

Quadrant B shows important service elements that are being performed well; the company
needs to maintain the high performance.
Quadrant C shows minor service elements that are being delivered in a mediocre way but do
not need any attention.
Quadrant D shows that a minor service element, “Send out maintenance notices,” is being performed in an excellent manner.

Perhaps the company should spend less on sending out maintenance notices and use the savings to
improve performance on important elements. Management can enhance its analysis by checking
on the competitors’ performance levels on each element.54

SATISFYING CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS On average, 40 percent of customers who
suffer through a bad service experience stop doing business with the company.55 But if those
customers are willing to complain first, they actually offer the company a gift if the complaint is
handled well.
Companies that encourage disappointed customers to complain—and also empower employees to remedy the situation on the spot—have been shown to achieve higher revenues and
greater profits than companies without a systematic approach for addressing service failures.56
Pizza Hut prints its toll-free number on all pizza boxes. When a customer complains, Pizza
Hut sends a voice mail to the store manager, who must call the customer within 48 hours and
resolve the complaint.
Getting frontline employees to adopt extra-role behaviors, and to advocate the interests and image of the firm to consumers, as well as take initiative and engage in conscientious behavior in dealing with customers, can be a critical asset in handling complaints.57 Customers evaluate complaint
incidents in terms of the outcomes they receive, the procedures used to arrive at those outcomes,
and the nature of interpersonal treatment during the process.58
Companies also are increasing the quality of their call centers and their customer service representatives (CSRs). “Marketing Insight: Improving Company Call Centers” illustrates what top companies are doing.

Differentiating Services
Finally, customers who view a service as fairly homogeneous care less about the provider than
about the price. Marketing excellence requires service marketers to continually differentiate their
brands so they are not seen as a commodity.

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SERVICE OPTIONS Marketers can differentiate their
service offerings in many ways, through people and processes that add value. What the customer

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

Marketing Insight
Improving Company Call Centers
Many firms have learned the hard way that demanding, empowered customers will no longer put up with poor service when contacting companies.
After Sprint and Nextel merged, they set out to run their call centers as cost centers, rather than a means to enhance customer loyalty.
Employee rewards were based on keeping customer calls short, and
when management started to monitor even bathroom trips, morale
sank. With customer churn spinning out of control, Sprint Nextel began
a service improvement plan at the end of 2007 to put more emphasis
on service over efficiency. Among other changes that accompanied the
appointment of the firm’s first chief service officer, call center operators
were rewarded for solving problems on a customer’s first call, rather
than for keeping their calls short. The average customer contacted
customer service four times in 2008, a drop from eight times in 2007.
Some firms are getting smarter about the type of calls they send
overseas to off-shore call centers. They are investing more in training as

Schneider National

369

well as returning more complex calls to highly trained domestic customer service reps. Homeshoring occurs when a customer service rep
works from home with a broadband line and computer. These at-home
reps often provide higher-quality service at less cost and with lower
turnover.
Firms have to manage their number of customer service reps
carefully. One study showed that cutting just four reps at a call center
of three dozen sent the number of customers put on hold for four minutes or more from zero to eighty. Firms can also try to reasonably get
more from each rep. USAA cross-trains its call center reps so that
agents who answer investment queries can also respond to insurance-related calls, reducing the number of transfers between agents
and increasing productivity as a result. USAA and other firms such as
KeyBank and Ace Hardware have also consolidated call center operations into fewer locations, allowing them to maintain their number of
reps in the process.
Finally, keeping call center reps happy and motivated is obviously
also a key to their ability to offer excellent customer service. American
Express lets call center reps choose their own hours and swap shifts
without a supervisor’s approval.
Sources: Michael Sanserino and Cari Tuna, “Companies Strive Harder to
Please Customers,” Wall Street Journal, July 27, 2009, p. B4; Spencer E. Ante,
“Sprint’s Wake-Up Call,” BusinessWeek, March 3, 2008, pp. 54–57; Jena
McGregor, “Customer Service Champs,” BusinessWeek, March 5, 2007;
Jena McGregor, “When Service Means Survival,” BusinessWeek, March 2,
2009, pp. 26–30.

expects is called the primary service package. Vanguard, the second-largest no-load mutual fund
company, has a unique client ownership structure that lowers costs and permits better fund
returns. Strongly differentiated from many competitors, the brand grew through word of mouth,
PR, and viral marketing.59
The provider can add secondary service features to the package. In the hotel industry, various
chains have introduced such secondary service features as merchandise for sale, free breakfast buffets, and loyalty programs.
The major challenge is that most service offerings and innovations are easily copied. Still,
the company that regularly introduces innovations will gain a succession of temporary advantages over competitors. Schneider National keeps a step ahead of its competitors by never
standing still.

Schneider National
is the world’s largest long-haul truckload freight carrier, with
$3.7 billion in revenues and more than 54,000 bright orange
tractors and trailers on the roads. Although its core benefit is
to move freight from one location to another, Schneider sees
itself in the customer solutions business. Its service guarantees are
backed by monetary incentives for drivers who meet tight schedules;
driver-training programs improve performance. Schneider was the first to
introduce in-cab satellite technology and mobile technology to every driver.
In 2009, it had its biggest award-winning year, garnering 43 awards for
strong customer service, solutions, and commitment to the environment
from shippers, government organizations, and industry media. To actively
recruit the best drivers, Schneider advertises on television shows such as

| CHAPTER 13

Long-haul truckload freight carrier
Schneider National goes to great
lengths to satisfy its customers and
build its brand.

370

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Trick My Truck, on satellite radio, in newspapers, and online; employs Webinars and PR; and partners with AARP,
local organizations, and veterans’ groups. Even painting
the trucks Omaha orange was part of a branding strategy
to improve safety and create awareness.60

INNOVATION WITH SERVICES Innovation

Retail health clinics are reinventing patient care for minor illnesses
and injuries.

is as vital in services as in any industry. After years of
losing customers to its Hilton and Marriott hotel
competitors, Starwood decided to invest $1.7 billion
in its Sheraton chain of 400 properties worldwide to
give them fresher décor and brighter colors, as well
as more enticing lobbies, restaurants, and cafés. In
explaining the need for the makeover, one
hospitality industry expert noted, “There was a time
when Sheraton was one of the leading brands. But it
lagged in introducing new design and service
concepts and developed a level of inconsistency.”61
On the other hand, consider how these relatively new service categories emerged and how, in
some cases, organizations created creative solutions in existing categories.62
•

•

•

Online Travel. Online travel agents such as Expedia and Travelocity offer customers the
opportunity to conveniently book travel at discount prices. However, they make money only when
visitors go to their Web sites and book travel. Kayak is a newer online travel agency that applies the
Google business model of collecting money on a per-click basis. Kayak’s marketing emphasis is on
building a better search engine by offering more alternatives, flexibility, and airlines.
Retail Health Clinics. One of the hardest areas in which to innovate is health care. But
whereas the current health care system is designed to treat a small number of complex cases,
retail health clinics address a large number of simple cases. Retail health clinics such as Quick
Care, RediClinic, and MinuteClinic are often found in drugstores and other retail chain stores
such as Target and Walmart. They typically use nurse practitioners to handle minor illnesses
and injuries such as colds, flu, and ear infections, offer various health and wellness services
such as physicals and exams for high school sports, and perform vaccinations. They seek to offer convenient, predictable service and transparent pricing, without an appointment, seven
days a week. Most visits take no more than 15 minutes, and costs vary from $25 to $100.
Private Aviation. Initially, private aviation was restricted to owning or chartering a private
plane. Fractional ownership pioneered by NetJets allowed customers to pay a percentage of the
cost of a private plane plus maintenance and a direct hourly cost. Marquis Jets further innovated
with a simple idea of combining prepaid time on the world’s largest, best-maintained fleet, offering the consistency and benefits of fractional ownership without the long-term commitment.

Many companies are using the Web to offer primary or secondary service features that were
never possible before. Salesforce.com uses cloud computing—centralized computing services delivered over the Internet—to run customer-management databases for companies. Häagen-Dazs
estimated it would have had to spend $65,000 for a custom-designed database to stay in contact
with the company’s retail franchises across the country. Instead, it spent only $20,000 to set up an
account with Salesforce.com and pays $125 per month for 20 users to remotely monitor franchises
via the Web.63

Managing Service Quality
The service quality of a firm is tested at each service encounter. If employees are bored, cannot answer simple questions, or are visiting each other while customers are waiting, customers will think
twice about doing business there again. One business that understands how to treat customers right
is USAA.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

371

USAA From its beginnings, USAA focused on selling auto insurance, and later
other insurance products, to those with military service. It increased its share of each customer’s business by launching a consumer bank, issuing
credit cards, opening a discount brokerage, and offering a
selection of no-load mutual funds. Though it now conducts
transactions for more than 150 products and services on the phone or
online, USAA boasts one of the highest customer satisfaction ratings of
any company in the United States. It was the first bank to allow iPhone
deposits for its military customers, to routinely text balances to soldiers
in the field, and to heavily discount customers’ car insurance when
they are deployed overseas. A leader in virtually every customer service award or survey, the company
inspired one industry expert to comment: “There is nobody on this earth who understands their customer better than USAA.”64
Service outcome and customer loyalty are influenced by a host of variables. One study identified
more than 800 critical behaviors that cause customers to switch services.65 These behaviors fall into
eight categories (see
Table 13.3).
A more recent study honed in on the service dimensions customers would most like companies
to measure. As
Table 13.4 shows, knowledgeable frontline workers and the ability to achieve
one-call-and-done rose to the top.66
Flawless service delivery is the ideal state for any service organization. “Marketing Memo:
Recommendations for Improving Service Quality” offers a comprehensive set of guidelines to

TABLE 13.3

Factors Leading to Customer Switching Behavior

Pricing
• High price
• Price increases
• Unfair pricing
• Deceptive pricing
Inconvenience
• Location/hours
• Wait for appointment
• Wait for service
Core Service Failure
• Service mistakes
• Billing errors
• Service catastrophe
Service Encounter Failures
• Uncaring
• Impolite
• Unresponsive
• Unknowledgeable

Response to Service Failure
• Negative response
• No response
• Reluctant response
Competition
• Found better service
Ethical Problems
• Cheat
• Hard sell
• Unsafe
• Conflict of interest
Involuntary Switching
• Customer moved
• Provider closed

Source: Susan M. Keaveney, “Customer Switching Behavior in Service Industries: An Exploratory Study,” Journal of Marketing (April 1995),
pp. 71–82. Reprinted with permission from Journal of Marketing, published by the American Marketing Association.

By relentlessly focusing on its military customers, USAA has created
extraordinary levels of customer
satisfaction.

372

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

TABLE 13.4

Dimensions of Service Customers Want Companies
to Deliver

Knowledgeable employees

65%

Address my needs on first contact

64%

Treat me like a valued customer

62%
54%

Demonstrates desire to meet my needs
Can quickly access information

49%

Good value for the money

49%

Courteous employees

45%

Is a company/brand I can trust

43%

Treats me fairly

38%
31%

Provides relevant/personalized service
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

Source: Convergys 2008 U.S. Customer Scorecard

marketing

Memo

Recommendations for Improving Service Quality

Pioneers in conducting academic service research, Berry, Parasuraman, and
Zeithaml offer 10 lessons they maintain are essential for improving service
quality across service industries.
1. Listening—Service providers should understand what customers really want through continuous learning about the expectations and perceptions of customers and noncustomers (for instance, by means of a
service-quality information system).
2. Reliability—Reliability is the single most important dimension of service
quality and must be a service priority.
3. Basic service—Service companies must deliver the basics and do
what they are supposed to do—keep promises, use common sense,
listen to customers, keep customers informed, and be determined to
deliver value to customers.
4. Service design—Service providers should take a holistic view of the
service while managing its many details.
5. Recovery—To satisfy customers who encounter a service problem,
service companies should encourage customers to complain (and make
it easy for them to do so), respond quickly and personally, and develop a
problem-resolution system.

6. Surprising customers—Although reliability is the most important
dimension in meeting customers’ service expectations, process dimensions such as assurance, responsiveness, and empathy are most important in exceeding customer expectations, for example, by surprising them
with uncommon swiftness, grace, courtesy, competence, commitment,
and understanding.
7. Fair play—Service companies must make special efforts to be fair, and
to demonstrate fairness, to customers and employees.
8. Teamwork—Teamwork is what enables large organizations to deliver
service with care and attentiveness by improving employee motivation
and capabilities.
9. Employee research—Marketers should conduct research with employees to reveal why service problems occur and what companies must do
to solve problems.
10. Servant leadership—Quality service comes from inspired leadership
throughout the organization; from excellent service-system design;
from the effective use of information and technology; and from a
slow-to-change, invisible, all-powerful, internal force called corporate culture.

Sources: Leonard L. Berry, A. Parasuraman, and Valarie A. Zeithaml, “Ten Lessons for Improving Service Quality,” MSI Reports Working Paper Series, No.03-001 (Cambridge,
MA: Marketing Science Institute, 2003), pp. 61–82. See also, Leonard L. Berry’s books, On Great Service: A Framework for Action (New York: Free Press, 2006) and
Discovering the Soul of Service (New York: Free Press, 1999), as well as his articles; Leonard L. Berry, Venkatesh Shankar, Janet Parish, Susan Cadwallader, and Thomas
Dotzel, “Creating New Markets through Service Innovation,” Sloan Management Review (Winter 2006): 56–63; Leonard L. Berry, Stephan H. Haeckel, and Lewis P. Carbone,
“How to Lead the Customer Experience,” Marketing Management (January–February 2003), pp. 18–23; and Leonard L. Berry, Kathleen Seiders, and Dhruv Grewal,
“Understanding Service Convenience,” Journal of Marketing (July 2002), pp. 1–17.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

373

which top service marketing organizations can adhere. Two important considerations in service
delivery are managing customer expectations and incorporating self-service technologies.

Managing Customer Expectations
Customers form service expectations from many sources, such as past experiences, word of mouth,
and advertising. In general, customers compare the perceived service with the expected service.67 If
the perceived service falls below the expected service, customers are disappointed. Successful companies add benefits to their offering that not only satisfy customers but surprise and delight them.
Delighting customers is a matter of exceeding expectations.68
The service-quality model in
Figure 13.6 highlights the main requirements for delivering
high service quality.69 It identifies five gaps that cause unsuccessful delivery:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Gap between consumer expectation and management perception—Management does not
always correctly perceive what customers want. Hospital administrators may think patients
want better food, but patients may be more concerned with nurse responsiveness.
Gap between management perception and service-quality specification—Management
might correctly perceive customers’ wants but not set a performance standard. Hospital administrators may tell the nurses to give “fast” service without specifying it in minutes.
Gap between service-quality specifications and service delivery—Employees might be
poorly trained, or incapable of or unwilling to meet the standard; they may be held to conflicting standards, such as taking time to listen to customers and serving them fast.
Gap between service delivery and external communications—Consumer expectations are
affected by statements made by company representatives and ads. If a hospital brochure shows
a beautiful room but the patient finds it to be cheap and tacky looking, external communications have distorted the customer’s expectations.

Word-of-mouth
communications

Past experience

Personal needs

Service-Quality Model
Sources: A. Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and
Leonard L. Berry, “A Conceptual Model of Service
Quality and Its Implications for Future Research,”
Journal of Marketing (Fall 1985), p. 44. Reprinted
with permission of the American Marketing
Association. The model is more fully discussed or
elaborated in Valarie Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and
Dwayne D. Gremler, Services Marketing: Integrating
Customer Focus across the Firm, 4th ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2006).

Expected service
GAP 5
Perceived service
CONSUMER
MARKETER
Service delivery
(including preand post-contacts)
GAP 1

|Fig. 13.6|

GAP 3
Translation of
perceptions into
service-quality
specifications
GAP 2
Management
perceptions of
consumer
expectations

GAP 4

External
communications
to consumers

374

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

5.

Gap between perceived service and expected service—This gap occurs when the consumer
misperceives the service quality. The physician may keep visiting the patient to show care, but
the patient may interpret this as an indication that something really is wrong.

Based on this service-quality model, researchers identified five determinants of service quality,
in this order of importance:70
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Reliability—The ability to perform the promised service dependably and accurately.
Responsiveness—Willingness to help customers and provide prompt service.
Assurance—The knowledge and courtesy of employees and their ability to convey trust and
confidence.
Empathy—The provision of caring, individualized attention to customers.
Tangibles—The appearance of physical facilities, equipment, personnel, and communication
materials.

Based on these five factors, the researchers developed the 21-item SERVQUAL scale
(see
Table 13.5).71 They also note there is a zone of tolerance, or a range where a service
dimension would be deemed satisfactory, anchored by the minimum level consumers are willing to accept and the level they believe can and should be delivered.
The service-quality model in Figure 13.6 highlights some of the gaps that cause unsuccessful
service delivery. Subsequent research has extended the model. One dynamic process model of service
quality was based on the premise that customer perceptions and expectations of service quality
change over time, but at any one point they are a function of prior expectations about what will and
what should happen during the service encounter, as well as the actual service delivered during the
last contact.72 Tests of the dynamic process model reveal that the two different types of expectations have opposite effects on perceptions of service quality.
1.
2.

TABLE 13.5

Increasing customer expectations of what the firm will deliver can lead to improved perceptions of overall service quality.
Decreasing customer expectations of what the firm should deliver can also lead to improved
perceptions of overall service quality.

SERVQUAL Attributes

Reliability
• Providing service as promised
• Dependability in handling customers’ service problems
• Performing services right the first time
• Providing services at the promised time
• Maintaining error-free records
• Employees who have the knowledge to answer customer questions

Empathy
• Giving customers individual attention
• Employees who deal with customers in a caring fashion
• Having the customer’s best interests at heart
• Employees who understand the needs of their customers
• Convenient business hours

Responsiveness
• Keeping customer informed as to when services will be performed
• Prompt service to customers
• Willingness to help customers
• Readiness to respond to customers’ requests

Tangibles
• Modern equipment
• Visually appealing facilities
• Employees who have a neat, professional appearance
• Visually appealing materials associated with the service

Assurance
• Employees who instill confidence in customers
• Making customers feel safe in their transactions
• Employees who are consistently courteous
Source: A. Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry, “A Conceptual Model of Service Quality and Its Implications for Future Research,” Journal of Marketing (Fall 1985), pp. 41–50. Reprinted by
permission of the American Marketing Association.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

Much work has validated the role of expectations in consumers’ interpretations and evaluations
of the service encounter and the relationship they adopt with a firm over time.73 Consumers are
often forward-looking with respect to their decision to keep or switch from a service relationship.
Any marketing activity that affects current or expected future usage can help to solidify a service
relationship.
With continuously provided services, such as public utilities, health care, financial and computing services, insurance, and other professional, membership, or subscription services, customers
have been observed to mentally calculate their payment equity—the perceived economic benefits in
relationship to the economic costs. In other words, customers ask themselves, “Am I using this
service enough, given what I pay for it?”
Long-term service relationships can have a dark side. An ad agency client may feel that over time
the agency is losing objectivity, becoming stale in its thinking, or beginning to take advantage of the
relationship.74

Incorporating Self-Service Technologies (SSTs)
Consumers value convenience in services.75 Many person-to-person service interactions are being
replaced by self-service technologies (SSTs). To the traditional vending machines we can add automated teller machines (ATMs), self-pumping at gas stations, self-checkout at hotels, and a variety
of activities on the Internet, such as ticket purchasing, investment trading, and customization of
products.
Not all SSTs improve service quality, but they can make service transactions more accurate,
convenient, and faster. Obviously, they can also reduce costs. One technology firm, Comverse,
estimates the cost to answer a query through a call center at $7, but only 10 cents online. One
of its clients was able to direct 200,000 calls a week through online self-service support, saving
$52 million a year.76 Every company needs to think about improving its service using SSTs.
Marketing academics and consultants Jeffrey Rayport and Bernie Jaworski define a customerservice interface as any place at which a company seeks to manage a relationship with a customer,
whether through people, technology, or some combination of the two.77 They feel that although
many companies serve customers through a broad array of interfaces, from retail sales clerks to
Web sites to voice-response telephone systems, the whole often does not add up to the sum of its
parts, increasing complexity, costs, and customer dissatisfaction as a result. Successfully integrating technology into the workforce thus requires a comprehensive reengineering of the front office
to identify what people do best, what machines do best, and how to deploy them separately and
together.
Some companies have found that the biggest obstacle is not the technology itself, but convincing customers to use it, especially for the first time. Customers must have a clear sense of their roles
in the SST process, must see a clear benefit, and must feel they can actually use it.78 SST is not for
everyone. Although some automated voices are actually popular with customers—the unfailingly
polite and chipper voice of Amtrak’s “Julie” consistently wins kudos from callers—many can incite
frustration and even rage.

Managing Product-Support
Services
No less important than service industries are product-based industries that must provide a service
bundle. Manufacturers of equipment—small appliances, office machines, tractors, mainframes,
airplanes—all must provide product-support services. Product-support service is becoming a major
battleground for competitive advantage.
Chapter 12 described how products could be augmented with key service differentiators—
ordering ease, delivery, installation, customer training, customer consulting, maintenance,
and repair. Some equipment companies, such as Caterpillar Tractor and John Deere, make a
significant percentage of their profits from these services. 79 In the global marketplace,
companies that make a good product but provide poor local service support are seriously
disadvantaged.

| CHAPTER 13

375

376

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Many product companies have a stronger Web presence than they had before. They must ensure
that they offer adequate—if not superior—service online as well. “Marketing Memo: Assessing
E-Service Quality” reviews two models of online service quality.

Identifying and Satisfying Customer Needs
Traditionally, customers have had three specific worries about product service:80
•
•

•

They worry about reliability and failure frequency. A farmer may tolerate a combine that will
break down once a year, but not two or three times a year.
They worry about downtime. The longer the downtime, the higher the cost. The customer
counts on the seller’s service dependability—the seller’s ability to fix the machine quickly or at
least provide a loaner.81
They worry about out-of-pocket costs. How much does the customer have to spend on regular
maintenance and repair costs?

A buyer takes all these factors into consideration and tries to estimate the life-cycle cost, which
is the product’s purchase cost plus the discounted cost of maintenance and repair less the
discounted salvage value. A one-computer office will need higher product reliability and faster repair service than an office where other computers are available if one breaks down. An airline needs
100 percent reliability in the air. Where reliability is important, manufacturers or service providers
can offer guarantees to promote sales.

marketing

Memo

Assessing E-Service Quality

Academic researchers Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and Malhotra define
online service quality as the extent to which a Web site facilitates
efficient and effective shopping, purchasing, and delivery. They identified
11 dimensions of perceived e-service quality: access, ease of navigation,
efficiency, flexibility, reliability, personalization, security/privacy, responsiveness, assurance/trust, site aesthetics, and price knowledge. Some of
these service-quality dimensions were the same online as offline, but
some specific underlying attributes were different. Different dimensions
emerged with e-service quality too. Empathy didn’t seem to be as important online, unless there were service problems. Core dimensions of
regular service quality were efficiency, fulfillment, reliability, and privacy;
core dimensions of service recovery were responsiveness, compensation, and real-time access to help.
Another set of academic researchers, Wolfinbarger and Gilly, developed a reduced scale of online service quality with four key dimensions:
reliability/fulfillment, Web site design, security/privacy, and customer service. The researchers interpret their study findings to suggest that the
most basic building blocks of a “compelling online experience” are reliability and functionality to provide time savings, easy transactions, good
selection, in-depth information, and the “right” level of personalization.
Their 14-item scale looks like this:

You get what you ordered from this Web site.
The product is delivered by the time promised by the company.

Web Site Design
This Web site provides in-depth information.
The site doesn’t waste my time.
It is quick and easy to complete a transaction at this Web site.
The level of personalization at this site is about right, not too much or
too little.
This Web site has good selection.

Security/Privacy
I feel that my privacy is protected at this site.
I feel safe in my transactions with this Web site.
This Web site has adequate security transactions.

Customer Service
The company is willing and ready to respond to customer needs.

Reliability/Fulfillment

When you have a problem, the Web site shows a sincere interest in
solving it.

The product that came was represented accurately by the Web site.

Inquiries are answered promptly.

Sources: Mary Wolfinbarger and Mary C. Gilly, “E-TailQ: Dimensionalizing, Measuring, and Predicting E-Tail Quality,” Journal of Retailing 79 (Fall 2003), pp. 183–98; Valarie A.
Zeithaml, A. Parasuraman, and Arvind Malhotra, “A Conceptual Framework for Understanding E-Service Quality: Implications for Future Research and Managerial Practice,”
Marketing Science Institute Working Paper, Report No. 00-115, 2000.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

| CHAPTER 13

377

To provide the best support, a manufacturer must identify the services customers value most
and their relative importance. For expensive equipment, manufacturers offer facilitating services
such as installation, staff training, maintenance and repair services, and financing. They may also
add value-augmenting services that extend beyond the functioning and performance of the product
itself. Johnson Controls reached beyond its climate control equipment and components business to
manage integrated facilities by offering products and services that optimize energy use and improve comfort and security.
A manufacturer can offer, and charge for, product-support services in different ways. One specialty organic-chemical company provides a standard offering plus a basic level of services. If the
customer wants additional services, it can pay extra or increase its annual purchases to a higher
level, in which case additional services are included. Many companies offer service contracts (also
called extended warranties), in which sellers agree to provide free maintenance and repair services
for a specified period of time at a specified contract price.
Product companies must understand their strategic intent and competitive advantage in
developing services. Are service units supposed to support or protect existing product businesses or to grow as an independent platform? Are the sources of competitive advantage based
on economies of scale or economies of skill?82 See
Figure 13.7 strategies of different service
companies.

Postsale Service Strategy
The quality of customer service departments varies greatly. At one extreme are departments that
simply transfer customer calls to the appropriate person or department for action with little follow-up. At the other extreme are departments eager to receive customer requests, suggestions, and
even complaints and handle them expeditiously. Some firms even proactively contact customers to
provide service after the sale is complete.83

CUSTOMER-SERVICE EVOLUTION Manufacturers usually start by running their own
parts-and-service departments. They want to stay close to the equipment and know its problems.
They also find it expensive and time consuming to train others and discover they can make good
money from parts and service if they are the only supplier and can charge a premium price. In fact,
many equipment manufacturers price their equipment low and compensate by charging high
prices for parts and service.

|Fig. 13.7|

Service Strategies for Product Companies

Source of Competitive Advantage

Strategic Intent
Economies of scale

Protect or Enhance Product

Expand Independent Service

• Apple’s iPod music download and transaction

• Cardinal Healthcare’s hospital inventory-management

management service (iTunes)

• Otis Elevator’s remote monitoring and diagnostics services
• General Motors’ OnStar auto remote diagnostics service
• Symantec’s virus protection and data security
services
Economies of skill

• Cisco’s network integration and maintenance
services

• EMC’s storage-management and maintenance
services

• SAP Systems’ integration services
• UTC’s utilities field support services

services

• Cincinnati Bell’s billing services (now part of Convergys)
• IBM’s data-center-outsourcing services
• Johnson Controls’ integrated facilities-management
services

• Cincinnati Bell’s call-center-management services (now
part of Convergys)

• General Electric’s aircraft-engine-maintenance services
• GE Healthcare’s hospital equipment—support and
diagnostics services for hospital equipment

• IBM’s systems integration services

Source: Byron G. Auguste, Eric P. Harmon, and Vivek Pandit, “The Right Service Strategies for Product Companies,” The McKinsey Quarterly, no. 1 (2006), pp. 41–51. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of McKinsey & Company.

378

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Over time, manufacturers switch more maintenance and repair service to authorized distributors
and dealers. These intermediaries are closer to customers, operate in more locations, and can offer
quicker service. Still later, independent service firms emerge and offer a lower price or faster service.
A significant percentage of auto-service work is now done outside franchised automobile dealerships
by independent garages and chains such as Midas Muffler, and Sears. Independent service organizations handle mainframes, telecommunications equipment, and a variety of other equipment lines.

THE CUSTOMER-SERVICE IMPERATIVE Customer-service choices are increasing rapidly,
however, and equipment manufacturers increasingly must figure out how to make money on their
equipment, independent of service contracts. Some new-car warranties now cover 100,000 miles before
servicing. The increase in disposable or never-fail equipment makes customers less inclined to pay
2 percent to 10 percent of the purchase price every year for a service. A company with several hundred
laptops, printers, and related equipment might find it cheaper to have its own service people on-site.

Summary
1. A service is any act or performance that one party can
offer to another that is essentially intangible and does
not result in the ownership of anything. It may or may
not be tied to a physical product.
2. Services are intangible, inseparable, variable, and perishable. Each characteristic poses challenges and requires certain strategies. Marketers must find ways to
give tangibility to intangibles, to increase the productivity of service providers, to increase and standardize the
quality of the service provided, and to match the supply
of services with market demand.
3. Marketing of services faces new realities in the 21st
century due to customer empowerment, customer coproduction, and the need to satisfy employees as well
as customers.
4. In the past, service industries lagged behind manufacturing firms in adopting and using marketing concepts and tools, but this situation has changed.
Achieving excellence in service marketing calls not
only for external marketing but also for internal marketing to motivate employees, as well as interactive

marketing to emphasize the importance of both “high
tech” and “high touch.”
5. Top service companies excel at the following practices: a
strategic concept, a history of top-management commitment to quality, high standards, profit tiers, and systems
for monitoring service performance and customer complaints. They also differentiate their brands through primary
and secondary service features and continual innovation.
6. Superior service delivery requires managing customer
expectations and incorporating self-service technologies. Customers’ expectations play a critical role in their
service experiences and evaluations. Companies must
manage service quality by understanding the effects of
each service encounter.
7. Even product-based companies must provide postpurchase service. To offer the best support, a manufacturer must identify the services customers value most
and their relative importance. The service mix includes
both presale services (facilitating and value-augmenting
services) and postsale services (customer service
departments, repair and maintenance services).

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is Service Marketing Different from
Product Marketing?
Some service marketers maintain that service marketing is
fundamentally different from product marketing and relies
on different skills. Some traditional product marketers disagree, saying “good marketing is good marketing.”
Take a position: Product and service marketing are
fundamentally different versus Product and service
marketing are highly related.

Marketing Discussion
Educational Institutions
Colleges, universities, and other educational institutions can
be classified as service organizations. How can you apply
the marketing principles developed in this chapter to your
school? Do you have any advice as to how it could become
a better service marketer?

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

Marketing Excellence

>>The Ritz-Carlton

Few brands attain such a high standard of customer
service as the luxury hotel, The Ritz-Carlton. The RitzCarlton dates back to the early 20th century and the original Ritz-Carlton Boston, which revolutionized the way
U.S. travelers viewed and experienced customer service
and luxury in a hotel. The Ritz-Carlton Boston was the
first of its kind to provide guests with a private bath in
each guest room, fresh flowers throughout the hotel, and
an entire staff dressed in formal white tie, black tie, or
morning coat attire.
In 1983, hotelier Horst Schulze and a four-person development team acquired the rights to the Ritz-Carlton
name and created the Ritz-Carlton concept as it is known
today: a company-wide concentration on both the personal and the functional side of service. The five-star hotel
provides impeccable facilities but also takes customer
service extremely seriously. Its credo is, “We are Ladies
and Gentlemen serving Ladies and Gentlemen.”
According to the company’s Web site, The Ritz-Carlton
“pledge(s) to provide the finest personal service and facilities for our guests who will always enjoy a warm, relaxed,
yet refined ambience.”
The Ritz-Carlton fulfills this promise by providing impeccable training for its employees and executing its Three
Steps of Service and 12 Service Values. The Three Steps of
Service state that employees must use a warm and sincere
greeting always using the guest’s name, anticipate and fulfill each guest’s needs, and give a warm good-bye again
using the guest’s name. Every manager carries a laminated
card with the 12 Service Values, which include bullets such
as number 3: “I am empowered to create unique, memorable and personal experiences for our guests,” and number 10: “I am proud of my professional appearance,
language and behavior.” Simon Cooper, the company

| CHAPTER 13

379

president and chief operating officer, explained, “It’s all
about people. Nobody has an emotional experience with a
thing. We’re appealing to emotions.” The Ritz-Carlton’s
38,000 employees at 70 hotels in 24 countries go out of
their way to create unique and memorable experiences for
their guests.
While The Ritz-Carlton is known for training its employees on exceptional customer service, the hotel also
reinforces its mission and values to its employees on a
daily basis. Each day, managers gather their employees
for a 15-minute “line up.” During this time, managers
touch base with their employees, resolve any impending
problems, and spend the remaining time reading and discussing what The Ritz-Carlton calls “wow stories.”
The same “wow story” of the day is read to every
single employee around the world. These true stories recognize an individual employee for his or her outstanding
customer service and also highlight one of the 12 Service
Values. For example, one family staying at the Ritz-Carlton,
Bali, needed a particular type of egg and milk for their son
who suffered from food allergies. Employees could not find
the appropriate items in town, but the executive chef at the
hotel remembered a store in Singapore that sold them. He
contacted his mother-in-law, who purchased the items
and personally flew them over 1,000 miles to Bali for the
family. This example showcased Service Value 6: “I own
and immediately resolve guests’ problems.”
In another instance, a waiter overheard a man telling
his wife, who used a wheelchair, that it was too bad he
couldn’t get her down to the beach. The waiter told the
maintenance crew, and by the next day they had constructed a wooden walkway down to the beach and
pitched a tent at the far end where the couple had dinner.
According to Cooper, the daily wow story is “the best way
to communicate what we expect from our ladies and gentlemen around the world. Every story reinforces the actions we are looking for and demonstrates how each and
every person in our organization contributes to our service
values.” As part of company policy, each employee is entitled to spend up to $2,000 on a guest to help deliver an
anticipated need or desire.
The hotel measures the success of its customer
service efforts through Gallup phone interviews, which
ask both functional and emotional questions.
Functional questions ask “How was the meal? Was
your bedroom clean?” while emotional questions
uncover a sense of the customer’s well-being. The RitzCarlton uses these findings as well as day-to-day
experiences to continually enhance and improve the
experience for its guests.
In less than three decades, The Ritz-Carlton has
grown from 4 locations to over 70 and earned two
Malcolm Baldrige Quality Awards—the only company
ever to win the prestigious award twice.

380

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Questions
1. How does The Ritz-Carlton match up to competitive
hotels? What are the key differences?

Sources: Robert Reiss, “How Ritz-Carlton Stays at Top,” Forbes, October 30, 2009; Carmine Gallo,
“Employee Motivation the Ritz-Carlton Way,” BusinessWeek, February 29, 2008; Carmine Gallo,
“How Ritz-Carlton Maintains Its Mystique,” BusinessWeek, February 13, 2007; Jennifer Robison,
“How The Ritz-Carlton Manages the Mystique,” Gallup Management Journal, December 11, 2008;
The Ritz Carlton, www.RitzCarlton.com.

2. Discuss the importance of the “wow stories” in customer service for a luxury hotel like The Ritz-Carlton.

Marketing Excellence

>>Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic is the first and largest integrated not-for-profit
medical group practice in the world. William and Charles
Mayo founded the clinic over 100 years ago as a small
outpatient facility and pioneered the concept of a medical
group practice—a model that is widely used today.
Mayo Clinic provides exceptional medical care and
leads the nation in many specialties such as cancer, heart
disease, respiratory disorders, and urology. It consistently
ranks at the top of U.S. News & World Report’s Best
Hospitals list and enjoys 85 percent brand recognition
among U.S. adults. It has reached this level of success by
taking a different approach from most clinics and hospitals and putting a relentless focus on the patient’s experience. The clinic’s two interrelated core values trace back
to its founders and are at the heart of all the organization
does: placing the patient’s interests above all others and
practicing teamwork.
Every aspect of the patient’s experience is considered
at Mayo Clinic’s three campuses in Rochester (MN),
Scottsdale (AZ), and Jacksonville (FL). The moment a patient walks into one of Mayo Clinic’s facilities, he or she
feels the difference. New patients are welcomed by professional greeters who walk them through the administrative processes. Returning patients are greeted by name

and with a warm smile. The buildings have been designed
so that, in the words of the architect of one, “patients feel
a little better before they see their doctors.” The 21-story
Gonda Building in Rochester has spectacular wide-open
spaces with the capability of adding 10 more floors. Fine
art hangs on the walls, and doctor’s offices are designed
to feel cozy and comforting rather than sterile and
impersonal.
The lobby of the Mayo Clinic hospital in Scottsdale
has an indoor waterfall and a wall of windows overlooking
mountains. In pediatric exam rooms, resuscitation equipment is hidden behind a large cheery picture. Hospital
rooms feature microwave ovens and chairs that really do
convert to beds because, as one staff member explained,
“People don’t come to the hospital alone.” The newest
emergency medical helicopter was customized to incorporate high-tech medical equipment and is one of the
most advanced aircraft in the world.
The other significant difference in serving patients is
Mayo Clinic’s concept of teamwork. A patient can come
to Mayo Clinic with or without a physician’s referral. At
that time, the patient’s team is assembled, which can include the primary physician, surgeons, radiation oncologists, radiologists, nurses, residents, or other specialists
with the appropriate skill, experience, and knowledge.
Teams of medical professionals work together to diagnose patients’ medical problems, including debating
test results for hours to determine the most accurate diagnosis and best treatments. Once a team consensus
has been reached, the leader meets with the patient and
discusses his or her options. Throughout the process, patients are encouraged to take part in the discussion. If
surgery is necessary, the procedure is often scheduled to
take place within 24 hours, a dramatic difference from the
long wait patients experience at many hospitals. Mayo
Clinic’s doctors understand that those who seek their
care want action as soon as possible.
Mayo’s doctors are put on salary instead of being
paid by the number of patients seen or tests ordered. As
a result, patients receive more individualized attention and
care, and physicians work together instead of against
each other. As one pediatrician at Mayo explained, “We’re
very comfortable with calling colleagues for what I call

DESIGNING AND MANAGING SERVICES

‘curbside consulting.’ I don’t have to make a decision
about splitting a fee or owing someone something. It’s
never a case of quid pro quo.”
Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit, so all its operating income is invested back into the clinic’s research and
education programs. Breakthrough research is quickly implemented into the quality care of the patients. Mayo Clinic
offers educational programs through its five schools, and
many of its physicians come up through these programs
with Mayo’s philosophies engrained in their heads, including Mayo’s motto: “The best interest of the patient is the
only interest to be considered.”
President Obama often cites Mayo Clinic as a key example in health care reform. Mayo Clinic has been recognized by third parties for decades for its independent
thinking, outstanding service and performance, and core
focus on patient care and satisfaction.

| CHAPTER 13

381

Questions
1. Explain why Mayo Clinic is so good at customer service. Why has it been so successful practicing medicine
differently from other hospitals?
2. Do conflicts of interest exist between wanting to
make your patient happy and providing the best medical care possible? Why or why not?
Sources: Avery Comarow, “America’s Best Hospitals,” U.S. News & World Report, July 15, 2009;
Chen May Yee, “Mayo Clinic Reports 2007 Revenue Grew 10%,” Star Tribune, March 17, 2008;
Leonard L. Berry and Kent D. Seltman, Management Lessons from Mayo Clinic (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2008); Leonard L. Berry, “Leadership Lessons from Mayo Clinic,” Organizational
Dynamics 33 (August 2004), pp. 228–42; Leonard L. Berry and Neeli Bendapudi, “Clueing in
Customers,” Harvard Business Review, February 2003, pp. 100–106; John La Forgia, Kent
Seltman, and Scott Swanson, “Mayo Clinic: Sustaining a Legacy Brand and Leveraging Its
Equity in the 21st-Century Market,” Presentation at the Marketing Science Institute’s
Conference on Brand Orchestration, Orlando, FL, December 4–5, 2003; Paul Roberts,
“The Agenda—Total Teamwork,” Fast Company, March 31, 1999.

382

PART 5

r
e
t
ap
h
C

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

14

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. How do consumers process and evaluate prices?
2. How should a company set prices initially for products
or services?
3. How should a company adapt prices to meet varying
circumstances and opportunities?
4. When should a company initiate a price change?
5. How should a company respond to a competitor’s price
change?

As a high-end luxury goods provider,
Tiffany & Co. knows the importance of
preserving the integrity of its prices.

Developing Pricing
Strategies and Programs
Price is the one element of the marketing mix that produces revenue;
the other elements produce costs. Prices are perhaps the easiest element of the marketing
program to adjust; product features, channels, and even communications take more time. Price
also communicates to the market the company’s intended value positioning of its product or
brand. A well-designed and marketed product can command a price premium and reap big
profits. But new economic realities have caused many consumers to pinch pennies, and many
companies have had to carefully review their pricing strategies as a result.

For its entire century-and-a-half history, Tiffany’s name has connoted diamonds and
luxury. Tiffany designed a pitcher for Abraham Lincoln’s inaugural, made swords for the
Civil War, introduced sterling silver to the United States, and designed the “E Pluribus
Unum” insignia that adorns $1 bills as well as the Super Bowl and NASCAR trophies.
A cultural icon—its Tiffany Blue color is even trademarked—Tiffany has survived the
economy’s numerous ups and downs through the years. With the emergence in the late 1990s of the
notion of “affordable luxuries,” Tiffany seized the moment by creating a line of cheaper silver jewelry.
Its “Return to Tiffany” silver bracelet became a must-have item for teens of a certain set. Earnings
skyrocketed for the next five years, but the affordable jewelry brought both an image and a pricing
crisis for the company: What if all those teens who bought Tiffany
charm bracelets grew up to think of Tiffany only as a place where they
Pricing decisions are clearly complex and difficult,
got the jewelry of their girlhood? Starting in 2002, the company began
and many marketers neglect their pricing strategies.2 Holistic
hiking prices again. At the same time, it launched higher-end
marketers must take into account many factors in making pricing
collections, renovated stores to feature expensive items appealing to
decisions—the company, the customers, the competition, and the
mature buyers, and expanded aggressively into new cities and shop- marketing environment. Pricing decisions must be consistent
ping malls. When the recession began in 2008, the firm knew it had to with the firm’s marketing strategy and its target markets and
be careful not to dilute its high-end appeal. Tiffany offset softer sales brand positionings.
largely with cost-cutting and inventory management, and—very
In this chapter, we provide concepts and tools to facilitate
quietly—it lowered prices on its best-selling engagement rings only, by the setting of initial prices and adjusting prices over time and
roughly 10 percent.1
markets.

Understanding Pricing
Price is not just a number on a tag. It comes in many forms and performs many functions. Rent,
tuition, fares, fees, rates, tolls, retainers, wages, and commissions are all the price you pay for some
good or service. Price also has many components. If you buy a new car, the sticker price may be
adjusted by rebates and dealer incentives. Some firms allow for payment through multiple forms,
such as $150 plus 25,000 frequent flier miles for a flight.3
Throughout most of history, prices were set by negotiation between buyers and sellers.
Bargaining is still a sport in some areas. Setting one price for all buyers is a relatively modern idea
383

384

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

that arose with the development of large-scale retailing at the end of the nineteenth century. F. W.
Woolworth, Tiffany & Co., John Wanamaker, and others advertised a “strictly one-price policy,”
because they carried so many items and supervised so many employees.
Traditionally, price has operated as a major determinant of buyer choice. Consumers and purchasing agents who have access to price information and price discounters put pressure on retailers
to lower their prices. Retailers in turn put pressure on manufacturers to lower their prices. The
result can be a marketplace characterized by heavy discounting and sales promotion.

A Changing Pricing Environment
Pricing practices have changed significantly. At the turn of the 21st century, consumers had easy access to credit, so by combining unique product formulations with enticing marketing campaigns,
many firms successfully traded consumers up to more expensive products and services. The onset
of the Great Recession—a recession more severe than previous recessions, which resulted in many
jobs lost and many businesses and consumers unable to receive loans due to their poorly leveraged
situations—changed things though.
A combination of environmentalism, renewed frugality, and concern about jobs and home values forced many U.S. consumers to rethink how they spent their money. They replaced luxury purchases with basics. They bought fewer accessories like jewelry, watches, and bags. They ate at home
more often and purchased espresso machines to make lattes in their kitchens instead of buying
them at expensive cafés. If they bought a new car at all, they downsized to smaller, more fuelefficient models. They even cut back spending on hobbies and sports activities.4
Downward price pressure from a changing economic environment coincided with some longerterm trends in the technological environment. For some years now, the Internet has been changing
how buyers and sellers interact. Here is a short list of how the Internet allows sellers to discriminate
between buyers, and buyers to discriminate between sellers.5
Buyers can:
•

•

•

Get instant price comparisons from thousands of vendors. Customers can compare the
prices offered by multiple bookstores by just clicking mySimon.com. PriceSCAN.com lures
thousands of visitors a day, most of them corporate buyers. Intelligent shopping agents
(“bots”) take price comparison a step further and seek out products, prices, and reviews from
hundreds if not thousands of merchants.
Name their price and have it met. On Priceline.com, the customer states the price he or she
wants to pay for an airline ticket, hotel, or rental car, and Priceline looks for any seller willing
to meet that price.6 Volume-aggregating sites combine the orders of many customers and press
the supplier for a deeper discount.
Get products free. Open Source, the free software movement that started with Linux, will
erode margins for just about any company creating software. The biggest challenge confronting Microsoft, Oracle, IBM, and virtually every other major software producer is: How do
you compete with programs that can be had for free? “Marketing Insight: Giving It All Away”
describes how different firms have been successful with essentially free offerings.

Marketing Insight
Giving It All Away
Giving away products for free via sampling has been a successful marketing tactic for years. Estée Lauder gave free samples of cosmetics to
celebrities, and organizers at awards shows lavish winners with plentiful

free items or gifts known as “swag.” Other manufacturers, such as
Gillette and HP, have built their business model around selling the host
product essentially at cost and making money on the sale of necessary
supplies, such as razor blades and printer ink.
With the advent of the Internet, software companies began to
adopt similar practices. Adobe gave away its PDF Reader for free in
1994, as did Macromedia with its Shockwave player in 1995. Their
software became the industry standard, but the firms really made
their money selling their authoring software. More recently, Internet
start-ups such as Blogger Weblog publishing tool, MySpace online
community, and Skype Internet phone calls have all achieved some
success with a “freemium” strategy—free online services with a premium component.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief of Wired, strongly believes that in a
digital marketplace, companies can make money with “free” products. As
evidence, he offers revenue models involving cross-subsidies (giving
away a DVR to sell cable service) and freemiums (offering the Flickr online photo management and sharing application for free to everyone
while selling the superior FlickrPro to more highly involved users).
Some online firms have successfully moved “from free to fee” and
begun charging for services. Under a new participative pricing mechanism that lets consumers decide the price they feel is warranted, buyers
often choose to pay more than zero and even enough that the seller’s
revenues increase over what a fixed price would have yielded.
Offline, profits for discount air carrier Ryanair have been sky-high
thanks to its revolutionary business model. The secret? Founder
Michael O’Leary thinks like a retailer, charging for almost everything
but the seat itself:
1. A quarter of Ryanair’s seats are free. O’Leary wants to double that
within five years, with the ultimate goal of making all seats free.
Passengers currently pay only taxes and fees of about $10 to $24,
with an average one-way fare of roughly $52.
2. Passengers pay extra for everything else: for checked luggage
($9.50 per bag), snacks ($5.50 for a hot dog, $4.50 for chicken
soup, $3.50 for water), and bus or train transportation into town
from the far-flung airports Ryanair uses ($24).
3. Flight attendants sell a variety of merchandise, including digital cameras ($137.50) and iPocket MP3 players ($165). Onboard gambling
and cell phone service are projected new revenue sources.

| CHAPTER 14

385

Other strategies cut costs or generate outside revenue:
4. Seats don’t recline, window shades and seat-back pockets have
been removed, and there is no entertainment. Seat-back trays
now carry ads, and the exteriors of the planes are giant
revenue-producing billboards for Vodafone Group, Jaguar, Hertz,
and others.
5. More than 99 percent of tickets are sold online. The Web site also
offers travel insurance, hotels, ski packages, and car rentals.
6. Only Boeing 737–800 jets are flown to reduce maintenance, and
flight crews buy their own uniforms.
The formula works for Ryanair’s customers; the airline flies 58 million of them to over 150 airports each year. All the extras add up to
20 percent of revenue. Ryanair enjoys net margins of 25 percent, more
than three times Southwest’s 7 percent. Some industry pundits even refer to Ryanair as “Walmart with wings!” European discount carrier
easyJet has adopted many of the same practices.
Sources: Chris Anderson, Free: The Future of a Radical Price (New York:
Hyperion, 2009); Peter J. Howe, “The Next Pinch: Fees to Check Bags,” Boston
Globe, March 8, 2007; Katherine Heires, “Why It Pays to Give Away the Store,”
Business 2.0 (October 2006): 36–37; Kerry Capel, “‘Wal-Mart with Wings,’”
BusinessWeek, November 27, 2006, pp. 44–45; Matthew Maier, “A Radical Fix for
Airlines: Make Flying Free,” Business 2.0 (April 2006): 32–34; Ju-Young Kim,
Martin Natter, and Martin Spann, “Pay What You Want: A New Participative
Pricing Mechanism,” Journal of Marketing 73 (January 2009), pp. 44–58; Koen
Pauwels and Allen Weiss, “Moving from Free to Fee: How Online Firms Market to
Change Their Business Model Successfully,” Journal of Marketing 72 (May 2008),
pp. 14–31; Bruce Myerson, “Skype Takes Its Show on the Road,” BusinessWeek,
October 29, 2007, p. 38.

Sellers can:
•

Monitor customer behavior and tailor offers to individuals. GE Lighting, which gets 55,000
pricing requests a year, has Web programs that evaluate 300 factors that go into a pricing
quote, such as past sales data and discounts, so it can reduce processing time from up to
30 days to 6 hours.
Discount airline Ryanair’s revolutionary business model is to charge
next to nothing for a seat on a
flight, but something for virtually
everything else.

386

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

•

Give certain customers access to special prices. Ruelala is a members-only Web site that sells
upscale women’s fashion, accessories, and footwear through limited-time sales, usually twoday events. Other business marketers are already using extranets to get a precise handle on
inventory, costs, and demand at any given moment in order to adjust prices instantly.
Both buyers and sellers can:

•

Negotiate prices in online auctions and exchanges or even in person. Want to sell hundreds
of excess and slightly worn widgets? Post a sale on eBay. Want to purchase vintage baseball
cards at a bargain price? Go to www.baseballplanet.com. With the advent of the recession,
many consumers began to take the practice of haggling over price honed at car dealers and flea
markets into other realms like real estate, jewelry, or virtually any retail durable purchase.
Almost three-quarters of U.S. consumers reported negotiating for lower prices in recent years,
up a third from the five years before the recession hit.7

How Companies Price
Companies do their pricing in a variety of ways. In small companies, the boss often sets prices. In
large companies, division and product line managers do. Even here, top management sets general
pricing objectives and policies and often approves lower management’s proposals.
Where pricing is a key factor (aerospace, railroads, oil companies), companies often establish a
pricing department to set or assist others in setting appropriate prices. This department reports to
the marketing department, finance department, or top management. Others who influence pricing
include sales managers, production managers, finance managers, and accountants.
Executives complain that pricing is a big headache—and getting worse by the day. Many companies do not handle pricing well and fall back on “strategies” such as: “We determine our costs and take
our industry’s traditional margins.” Other common mistakes are not revising price often enough to
capitalize on market changes; setting price independently of the rest of the marketing program rather
than as an intrinsic element of market-positioning strategy; and not varying price enough for different product items, market segments, distribution channels, and purchase occasions.
For any organization, effectively designing and implementing pricing strategies requires a
thorough understanding of consumer pricing psychology and a systematic approach to setting,
adapting, and changing prices.

Consumer Psychology and Pricing
Many economists traditionally assumed that consumers were “price takers” and accepted prices at
“face value” or as given. Marketers, however, recognize that consumers often actively process price
information, interpreting it from the context of prior purchasing experience, formal communications (advertising, sales calls, and brochures), informal communications (friends, colleagues, or
family members), point-of-purchase or online resources, and other factors.8
Purchase decisions are based on how consumers perceive prices and what they consider the
current actual price to be—not on the marketer’s stated price. Customers may have a lower
price threshold below which prices signal inferior or unacceptable quality, as well as an upper
price threshold above which prices are prohibitive and the product appears not worth the money.
The following example helps illustrate the large part consumer psychology plays in determining
three different prices for essentially the same item: a black T-shirt.

A Black T-Shirt

The black T-shirt for women looks pretty ordinary. In fact,
it’s not that different from the black T-shirt sold by Gap and by Swedish discount clothing
chain H&M. Yet, the Armani T-shirt costs $275.00, whereas the Gap item costs $14.90 and
the H&M one $7.90. Customers who purchase the Armani T-shirt are paying for a T-shirt
made of 70 percent nylon, 25 percent polyester, and 5 percent elastane, whereas the Gap and
H&M shirts are made mainly of cotton. True, the Armani T is a bit more stylishly cut than the other two and
sports a “Made in Italy” label, but how does it command a $275.00 price tag? A luxury brand, Armani is
primarily known for suits, handbags, and evening gowns that sell for thousands of dollars. In that context,
it can sell its T-shirts for more. But because there aren’t many takers for $275.00 T-shirts, Armani doesn’t

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

387

make many, thus further enhancing the appeal for status seekers who like
the idea of having a “limited edition” T-shirt. “Value is not only quality,
function, utility, channel of distribution,” says Arnold Aronson, managing
director of retail strategies for Kurt Salmon Associates and former CEO of
Saks Fifth Avenue; it’s also a customer’s perception of a brand’s luxury
connotations.9
Consumer attitudes about pricing took a dramatic shift in the recent economic downturn as many found themselves unable to sustain their lifestyles.10 Consumers began to buy more for need than
desire and to trade down more frequently in price. They shunned
conspicuous consumption, and sales of luxury goods suffered. Even
purchases that had never been challenged before were scrutinized.
Almost 1 million U.S. patients became “medical tourists” in 2010
and traveled overseas for medical procedures at lower costs, sometimes at the urging of U.S. health insurance companies.11
Even in a recession, however, some companies can command a
price premium if their offerings are unique and relevant enough to a large enough market segment.
Pangea Organics expanded distribution of its pricey $8 soaps and $50 oils, thanks to environmentally friendly organic formulations and clever, seed-infused packaging.12
Understanding how consumers arrive at their perceptions of prices is an important marketing priority. Here we consider three key topics—reference prices, price–quality inferences, and price endings.

REFERENCE PRICES Although consumers may have fairly good knowledge of price ranges,
surprisingly few can accurately recall specific prices.13 When examining products, however, they
often employ reference prices, comparing an observed price to an internal reference price they
remember or an external frame of reference such as a posted “regular retail price.”14
All types of reference prices are possible (see
Table 14.1), and sellers often attempt to manipulate them. For example, a seller can situate its product among expensive competitors to imply that
it belongs in the same class. Department stores will display women’s apparel in separate departments
differentiated by price; dresses in the more expensive department are assumed to be of better quality.15 Marketers also encourage reference-price thinking by stating a high manufacturer’s suggested
price, indicating that the price was much higher originally, or pointing to a competitor’s high price.16
When consumers evoke one or more of these frames of reference, their perceived price can vary from
the stated price.17 Research has found that unpleasant surprises—when perceived price is lower than the
stated price—can have a greater impact on purchase likelihood than pleasant surprises.18 Consumer
expectations can also play a key role in price response. On Internet auction sites such as eBay, when consumers know similar goods will be available in future auctions, they will bid less in the current auction.19

TABLE 14.1

Possible Consumer Reference Prices

• “Fair Price” (what consumers feel the product should cost)
• Typical Price
• Last Price Paid
• Upper-Bound Price (reservation price or the maximum most consumers would pay)
• Lower-Bound Price (lower threshold price or the minimum most consumers would pay)
• Historical Competitor Prices
• Expected Future Price
• Usual Discounted Price
Source: Adapted from Russell S. Winer, Pricing, MSI Relevant Knowledge Series (Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 2006).

The perceived value of a product
as simple as a black T-shirt depends in part on where it is sold.

388

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Clever marketers try to frame the price to signal the best value possible. For example, a relatively
expensive item can look less expensive if the price is broken into smaller units, such as a $500 annual membership for “under $50 a month,” even if the totals are the same.20

PRICE-QUALITY INFERENCES Many consumers use price as an indicator of quality. Image
pricing is especially effective with ego-sensitive products such as perfumes, expensive cars, and
designer clothing. A $100 bottle of perfume might contain $10 worth of scent, but gift givers pay
$100 to communicate their high regard for the receiver.
Price and quality perceptions of cars interact.21 Higher-priced cars are perceived to possess high
quality. Higher-quality cars are likewise perceived to be higher priced than they actually are. When
information about true quality is available, price becomes a less significant indicator of quality.
When this information is not available, price acts as a signal of quality.
Some brands adopt exclusivity and scarcity to signify uniqueness and justify premium pricing.
Luxury-goods makers of watches, jewelry, perfume, and other products often emphasize exclusivity
in their communication messages and channel strategies. For luxury-goods customers who desire
uniqueness, demand may actually increase price, because they then believe fewer other customers
can afford the product.22

PRICE ENDINGS Many sellers believe prices should end in an odd number. Customers see an
item priced at $299 as being in the $200 rather than the $300 range; they tend to process prices
“left-to-right” rather than by rounding.23 Price encoding in this fashion is important if there is a
mental price break at the higher, rounded price.
Another explanation for the popularity of “9” endings is that they suggest a discount or bargain,
so if a company wants a high-price image, it should probably avoid the odd-ending tactic.24 One
study showed that demand actually increased one-third when the price of a dress rose from $34 to
$39 but was unchanged when it rose from $34 to $44.25
Prices that end with 0 and 5 are also popular and are thought to be easier for consumers to
process and retrieve from memory.26 “Sale” signs next to prices spur demand, but only if not overused: Total category sales are highest when some, but not all, items in a category have sale signs;
past a certain point, sale signs may cause total category sales to fall.27
Pricing cues such as sale signs and prices that end in 9 are more influential when consumers’
price knowledge is poor, when they purchase the item infrequently or are new to the category, and
when product designs vary over time, prices vary seasonally, or quality or sizes vary across stores.28
They are less effective the more they are used. Limited availability (for example, “three days only”)
also can spur sales among consumers actively shopping for a product.29
A product priced at $2.99 can be
perceived as distinctly less expensive than one priced at $3.00.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

389

Setting the Price
A firm must set a price for the first time when it develops a new
product, when it introduces its regular product into a new distribution channel or geographical area, and when it enters bids on
new contract work. The firm must decide where to position its
product on quality and price.
Most markets have three to five price points or tiers. Marriott
Hotels is good at developing different brands or variations of brands
for different price points: Marriott Vacation Club—Vacation Villas
(highest price), Marriott Marquis (high price), Marriott (highmedium price), Renaissance (medium-high price), Courtyard
(medium price), TownePlace Suites (medium-low price), and Fairfield
Inn (low price). Firms devise their branding strategies to help convey
the price-quality tiers of their products or services to consumers.30
The firm must consider many factors in setting its pricing
policy.31
Table 14.2 summarizes the six steps in the process.

Step 1: Selecting the Pricing Objective
The company first decides where it wants to position its market offering. The clearer a firm’s objectives, the easier it is to set price. Five major objectives are: survival, maximum current profit, maximum market share, maximum market skimming, and product-quality leadership.

SURVIVAL Companies pursue survival as their major objective if they are plagued with
overcapacity, intense competition, or changing consumer wants. As long as prices cover variable
costs and some fixed costs, the company stays in business. Survival is a short-run objective; in the
long run, the firm must learn how to add value or face extinction.
MAXIMUM CURRENT PROFIT Many companies try to set a price that will maximize
current profits. They estimate the demand and costs associated with alternative prices and
choose the price that produces maximum current profit, cash flow, or rate of return on
investment. This strategy assumes the firm knows its demand and cost functions; in reality,
these are difficult to estimate. In emphasizing current performance, the company may sacrifice
long-run performance by ignoring the effects of other marketing variables, competitors’
reactions, and legal restraints on price.

MAXIMUM MARKET SHARE Some companies want to maximize their market share. They
believe a higher sales volume will lead to lower unit costs and higher long-run profit. They set the
lowest price, assuming the market is price sensitive. Texas Instruments (TI) famously practiced
this market-penetration pricing for years. TI would build a large plant, set its price as low as
possible, win a large market share, experience falling costs, and cut its price further as costs fell.
The following conditions favor adopting a market-penetration pricing strategy: (1) The market
is highly price sensitive and a low price stimulates market growth; (2) production and distribution

TABLE 14.2

Steps in Setting a Pricing Policy

1.

Selecting the Pricing Objective

2.

Determining Demand

3.

Estimating Costs

4.

Analyzing Competitors’ Costs, Prices, and Offers

5.

Selecting a Pricing Method

6.

Selecting the Final Price

Marriott’s hotel brands differ in
price points and the levels of
service they offer.

390

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

costs fall with accumulated production experience; and (3) a low price discourages
actual and potential competition.

Apple created an uproar among its
early-adopter customers when it
significantly lowered the price of
its iPhone after only two months.

MAXIMUM MARKET SKIMMING Companies unveiling a new technology
favor setting high prices to maximize market skimming. Sony is a frequent
practitioner of market-skimming pricing, in which prices start high and slowly
drop over time. When Sony introduced the world’s first high-definition television
(HDTV) to the Japanese market in 1990, it was priced at $43,000. So that Sony could
“skim” the maximum amount of revenue from the various segments of the market,
the price dropped steadily through the years—a 28-inch Sony HDTV cost just over
$6,000 in 1993, but a 40-inch Sony HDTV cost only $600 in 2010.
This strategy can be fatal, however, if a worthy competitor decides to price low.
When Philips, the Dutch electronics manufacturer, priced its videodisc players to
make a profit on each, Japanese competitors priced low and rapidly built their market share, which in turn pushed down their costs substantially.
Moreover, consumers who buy early at the highest prices may be dissatisfied if
they compare themselves to those who buy later at a lower price. When Apple
dropped the iPhone’s price from $600 to $400 only two months after its introduction, public outcry caused the firm to give initial buyers a $100 credit toward future
Apple purchases.32
Market skimming makes sense under the following conditions: (1) A sufficient
number of buyers have a high current demand; (2) the unit costs of producing a
small volume are high enough to cancel the advantage of charging what the traffic
will bear; (3) the high initial price does not attract more competitors to the market;
(4) the high price communicates the image of a superior product.
PRODUCT-QUALITY LEADERSHIP A company might aim to be the product-quality leader
in the market. Many brands strive to be “affordable luxuries”—products or services characterized
by high levels of perceived quality, taste, and status with a price just high enough not to be out of
consumers’ reach. Brands such as Starbucks, Aveda, Victoria’s Secret, BMW, and Viking have
positioned themselves as quality leaders in their categories, combining quality, luxury, and
premium prices with an intensely loyal customer base.33 Grey Goose and Absolut carved out a
superpremium niche in the essentially odorless, colorless, and tasteless vodka category through
clever on-premise and off-premise marketing that made the brands seem hip and exclusive.34
OTHER OBJECTIVES Nonprofit and public organizations may have other pricing objectives.
A university aims for partial cost recovery, knowing that it must rely on private gifts and public
grants to cover its remaining costs. A nonprofit hospital may aim for full cost recovery in its
pricing. A nonprofit theater company may price its productions to fill the maximum number of
seats. A social service agency may set a service price geared to client income.
Whatever the specific objective, businesses that use price as a strategic tool will profit more than
those that simply let costs or the market determine their pricing. For art museums, which earn an
average of only 5 percent of their revenues from admission charges, pricing can send a message that
affects their public image and the amount of donations and sponsorships they receive.

Step 2: Determining Demand
Each price will lead to a different level of demand and have a different impact on a company’s marketing objectives. The normally inverse relationship between price and demand is captured in a demand curve (see
Figure 14.1): The higher the price, the lower the demand. For prestige goods,
the demand curve sometimes slopes upward. One perfume company raised its price and sold more
rather than less! Some consumers take the higher price to signify a better product. However, if the
price is too high, demand may fall.

PRICE SENSITIVITY The demand curve shows the market’s probable purchase quantity at
alternative prices. It sums the reactions of many individuals with different price sensitivities. The
first step in estimating demand is to understand what affects price sensitivity. Generally speaking,
customers are less price sensitive to low-cost items or items they buy infrequently. They are also less
price sensitive when (1) there are few or no substitutes or competitors; (2) they do not readily

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

(b) Elastic Demand

Price

(a) Inelastic Demand

$15

$15

$10

$10

100 105
Quantity Demanded per Period

50
150
Quantity Demanded per Period

ESTIMATING DEMAND CURVES Most companies attempt to measure their demand curves
using several different methods.
Surveys can explore how many units consumers would buy at different proposed prices.
Although consumers might understate their purchase intentions at higher prices to discourage
the company from pricing high, they also tend to actually exaggerate their willingness to pay
for new products or services.37

TABLE 14.3
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

391

|Fig. 14.1|

Inelastic and Elastic
Demand

notice the higher price; (3) they are slow to change their buying habits; (4) they think the higher
prices are justified; and (5) price is only a small part of the total cost of obtaining, operating, and
servicing the product over its lifetime.
A seller can successfully charge a higher price than competitors if it can convince customers that
it offers the lowest total cost of ownership (TCO). Marketers often treat the service elements in a
product offering as sales incentives rather than as value-enhancing augmentations for which they
can charge. In fact, pricing expert Tom Nagle believes the most common mistake manufacturers
have made in recent years is to offer all sorts of services to differentiate their products without
charging for them.35
Of course, companies prefer customers who are less price-sensitive.
Table 14.3 lists some
characteristics associated with decreased price sensitivity. On the other hand, the Internet has the
potential to increase price sensitivity. In some established, fairly big-ticket categories, such as auto
retailing and term insurance, consumers pay lower prices as a result of the Internet. Car buyers use
the Internet to gather information and borrow the negotiating clout of an online buying service.36
But customers may have to visit multiple sites to realize these savings, and they don’t always do so.
Targeting only price-sensitive consumers may in fact be “leaving money on the table.”

•

| CHAPTER 14

Factors Leading to Less Price Sensitivity

The product is more distinctive.
Buyers are less aware of substitutes.
Buyers cannot easily compare the quality of substitutes.
The expenditure is a smaller part of the buyer’s total income.
The expenditure is small compared to the total cost of the end product.
Part of the cost is borne by another party.
The product is used in conjunction with assets previously bought.
The product is assumed to have more quality, prestige, or exclusiveness.
Buyers cannot store the product.

Source: Based on information from Thomas T. Nagle, John E. Hogan, and Joseph Zale, The Strategy and Tactics of Pricing, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2011). Printed and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

392

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

•

•

Price experiments can vary the prices of different products in a store or charge different
prices for the same product in similar territories to see how the change affects sales. Another
approach is to use the Internet. An e-business could test the impact of a 5 percent price increase by quoting a higher price to every 40th visitor, to compare the purchase response.
However, it must do this carefully and not alienate customers or be seen as reducing competition in any way (and thus violate the Sherman Antitrust Act).38
Statistical analysis of past prices, quantities sold, and other factors can reveal their relationships. The data can be longitudinal (over time) or cross-sectional (from different locations at
the same time). Building the appropriate model and fitting the data with the proper statistical
techniques calls for considerable skill, but sophisticated price optimization software and advances in database management have improved marketers’ abilities to optimize pricing.

One large retail chain was selling a line of “good-better-best” power drills at $90, $120, and $130,
respectively. Sales of the least and most expensive drills were fine, but sales of the midpriced drill
lagged. Based on a price optimization analysis, the retailer dropped the price of the midpriced drill
to $110. Sales of the low-priced drill dropped 4 percent because it seemed less of a bargain, but the
sales of the midpriced drill increased by 11 percent. Profits rose as a result.39
In measuring the price-demand relationship, the market researcher must control for various
factors that will influence demand.40 The competitor’s response will make a difference. Also, if the
company changes other aspects of the marketing program besides price, the effect of the price
change itself will be hard to isolate.

PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND Marketers need to know how responsive, or elastic,
demand is to a change in price. Consider the two demand curves in Figure 14.1. In demand curve
(a), a price increase from $10 to $15 leads to a relatively small decline in demand from 105 to 100.
In demand curve (b), the same price increase leads to a substantial drop in demand from 150 to 50.
If demand hardly changes with a small change in price, we say the demand is inelastic. If demand
changes considerably, demand is elastic.
The higher the elasticity, the greater the volume growth resulting from a 1 percent price reduction. If demand is elastic, sellers will consider lowering the price. A lower price will produce more
total revenue. This makes sense as long as the costs of producing and selling more units do not increase disproportionately.41
Price elasticity depends on the magnitude and direction of the contemplated price change. It
may be negligible with a small price change and substantial with a large price change. It may differ
for a price cut versus a price increase, and there may be a price indifference band within which price
changes have little or no effect.
Finally, long-run price elasticity may differ from short-run elasticity. Buyers may continue to
buy from a current supplier after a price increase but eventually switch suppliers. Here demand is
more elastic in the long run than in the short run, or the reverse may happen: Buyers may drop a
supplier after a price increase but return later. The distinction between short-run and long-run
elasticity means that sellers will not know the total effect of a price change until time passes.
One comprehensive study reviewing a 40-year period of academic research that investigated
price elasticity yielded interesting findings:42
•
•
•
•
•

The average price elasticity across all products, markets, and time periods studied was –2.62.
In other words, a 1 percent decrease in prices led to a 2.62 percent increase in sales.
Price elasticity magnitudes were higher for durable goods than for other goods, and higher for products in the introduction/growth stages of the product life cycle than in the mature/decline stages.
Inflation led to substantially higher price elasticities, especially in the short run.
Promotional price elasticities were higher than actual price elasticities in the short run (although the reverse was true in the long run).
Price elasticities were higher at the individual item or SKU level than at the overall brand level.

Step 3: Estimating Costs
Demand sets a ceiling on the price the company can charge for its product. Costs set the floor. The
company wants to charge a price that covers its cost of producing, distributing, and selling the
product, including a fair return for its effort and risk. Yet when companies price products to cover
their full costs, profitability isn’t always the net result.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

TYPES OF COSTS AND LEVELS OF PRODUCTION A company’s costs take two forms,

Cost per Unit

SRAC

1,000
Quantity Produced per Day
(b) Cost Behavior over
Different-Size Plants
1

SRAC
2

3

4

LRAC

1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000
Quantity Produced per Day

|Fig. 14.2|

Cost per Unit at
Different Levels of
Production per Period

ACCUMULATED PRODUCTION Suppose TI runs a plant that produces 3,000 hand
calculators per day. As TI gains experience producing hand calculators, its methods improve.
Workers learn shortcuts, materials flow more smoothly, and procurement costs fall. The result, as
Figure 14.3 shows, is that average cost falls with accumulated production experience. Thus the
average cost of producing the first 100,000 hand calculators is $10 per calculator. When the
company has produced the first 200,000 calculators, the average cost has fallen to $9. After its
accumulated production experience doubles again to 400,000, the average cost is $8. This decline in
the average cost with accumulated production experience is called the experience curve or
learning curve.
Now suppose three firms compete in this industry, TI, A, and B. TI is the lowest-cost producer
at $8, having produced 400,000 units in the past. If all three firms sell the calculator for $10, TI

Current
price

$10
Cost per Unit

B
A

$8

Experience
curve

TI

$6
$4
$2
100,000

200,000

400,000

800,000

Accumulated Production

393

(a) Cost Behavior in
a Fixed-Size Plant

Cost per Unit

fixed and variable. Fixed costs, also known as overhead, are costs that do not vary with production
level or sales revenue. A company must pay bills each month for rent, heat, interest, salaries, and so
on regardless of output.
Variable costs vary directly with the level of production. For example, each hand calculator produced by Texas Instruments incurs the cost of plastic, microprocessor chips, and packaging. These
costs tend to be constant per unit produced, but they’re called variable because their total varies
with the number of units produced.
Total costs consist of the sum of the fixed and variable costs for any given level of production.
Average cost is the cost per unit at that level of production; it equals total costs divided by production. Management wants to charge a price that will at least cover the total production costs at a
given level of production.
To price intelligently, management needs to know how its costs vary with different levels of production. Take the case in which a company such as TI has built a fixed-size plant to produce 1,000
hand calculators a day. The cost per unit is high if few units are produced per day. As production
approaches 1,000 units per day, the average cost falls because the fixed costs are spread over more
units. Short-run average cost increases after 1,000 units, however, because the plant becomes inefficient: Workers must line up for machines, getting in each other’s way, and machines break down
more often (see
Figure 14.2(a)).
If TI believes it can sell 2,000 units per day, it should consider building a larger plant. The
plant will use more efficient machinery and work arrangements, and the unit cost of producing 2,000 calculators per day will be lower than the unit cost of producing 1,000 per day. This
is shown in the long-run average cost curve (LRAC) in Figure 14.2(b). In fact, a 3,000-capacity
plant would be even more efficient according to Figure 14.2(b), but a 4,000-daily production
plant would be less so because of increasing diseconomies of scale: There are too many workers to manage, and paperwork slows things down. Figure 14.2(b) indicates that a 3,000-daily
production plant is the optimal size if demand is strong enough to support this level of
production.
There are more costs than those associated with manufacturing. To estimate the real profitability of selling to different types of retailers or customers, the manufacturer needs to use
activity-based cost (ABC) accounting instead of standard cost accounting, as described in
Chapter 5.

| CHAPTER 14

|Fig. 14.3|

Cost per Unit as a
Function of
Accumulated
Production: The
Experience Curve

394

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

makes $2 profit per unit, A makes $1 per unit, and B breaks even. The smart move for TI would be
to lower its price to $9. This will drive B out of the market, and even A may consider leaving. TI
will pick up the business that would have gone to B (and possibly A). Furthermore, price-sensitive
customers will enter the market at the lower price. As production increases beyond 400,000 units,
TI’s costs will drop still further and faster and will more than restore its profits, even at a price of
$9. TI has used this aggressive pricing strategy repeatedly to gain market share and drive others
out of the industry.
Experience-curve pricing nevertheless carries major risks. Aggressive pricing might give the
product a cheap image. It also assumes competitors are weak followers. The strategy leads the company to build more plants to meet demand, but a competitor may choose to innovate with a lowercost technology. The market leader is now stuck with the old technology.
Most experience-curve pricing has focused on manufacturing costs, but all costs can be improved on, including marketing costs. If three firms are each investing a large sum of money in
marketing, the firm that has used it longest might achieve the lowest costs. This firm can charge a
little less for its product and still earn the same return, all other costs being equal.43

TARGET COSTING Costs change with production scale and experience. They can also change
as a result of a concentrated effort by designers, engineers, and purchasing agents to reduce them
through target costing.44 Market research establishes a new product’s desired functions and the
price at which it will sell, given its appeal and competitors’ prices. This price less desired profit
margin leaves the target cost the marketer must achieve.
The firm must examine each cost element—design, engineering, manufacturing, sales—and
bring down costs so the final cost projections are in the target range. When ConAgra Foods decided
to increase the list prices of its Banquet frozen dinners to cover higher commodity costs, the average retail price of the meals increased from $1 to $1.25. When sales dropped significantly, management vowed to return to a $1 price, which necessitated cutting $250 million in other costs through
a variety of methods, such as centralized purchasing and shipping, less expensive ingredients, and
smaller portions.45
Companies can cut costs in many ways.46 With General Mills, it was as simple as reducing
the number of varieties of Hamburger Helper from 75 to 45 and the number of pasta shapes
from 30 to 10. Dropping multicolored Yoplait lids saved $2 million a year. Some companies are
applying what they learned from making affordable products with scarce resources in developing countries such as India to cutting costs in developed markets. Cisco blends teams of U.S.
software engineers with Indian supervisors. Other companies such as Aldi take advantage of the
global scope.

ConAgra learned the importance to
its customers of keeping its Banquet
frozen dinners priced at $1.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

395

Aldi

Aldi

Germany’s Aldi follows a simple formula globally. It stocks only about 1,000 of the
most popular everyday grocery and household items, compared with more than 20,000 at a traditional grocer such as Royal Ahold’s Albert Heijn. Almost all the products carry Aldi’s own exclusive label. Because it sells so few items, Aldi can exert strong control over quality and price and
simplify shipping and handling, leading to high margins. With more than 8,200 stores worldwide
currently, Aldi brings in almost $60 billion in annual sales.47

Step 4: Analyzing Competitors’ Costs, Prices,
and Offers

Green Works

Within the range of possible prices determined by market demand and company costs, the firm
must take competitors’ costs, prices, and possible price reactions into account. If the firm’s offer
contains features not offered by the nearest competitor, it should evaluate their worth to the customer and add that value to the competitor’s price. If the competitor’s offer contains some features
not offered by the firm, the firm should subtract their value from its own price. Now the firm can
decide whether it can charge more, the same, or less than the competitor.
The introduction or change of any price can provoke a response from customers, competitors,
distributors, suppliers, and even government. Competitors are most likely to react when the number
of firms is few, the product is homogeneous, and buyers are highly informed. Competitor reactions
can be a special problem when these firms have a strong value proposition, as Green Works did.

Green Works

Although the natural cleaner market was pioneered by
Seventh Generation and method cleaning products, Clorox Green Works now commands
42 percent market share. The Green Works product line consists of 10 natural cleaners
using biodegradable ingredients, packaged in recyclable materials, and not tested on
animals. The first major new Clorox brand in more than 20 years, it doubled the size of
the natural cleaning category with its strategy of “delivering a line of affordable products that are
good for consumers, good for retailers, and good for the environment.” The company charges only a
10 percent to 20 percent premium over conventional cleaners, versus the premium of 40 percent or
more charged by other natural cleaners. Launch marketing efforts included the use of viral marketing and social media, prominent TV coverage in shows like Ellen and Oprah, collaborations with retail
customers such as Safeway and Walmart in product development and in-store promotion, and an endorsement from and cause marketing program with the Sierra Club (resulting in a donation of
$645,000 to the organization in 2009).48
How can a firm anticipate a competitor’s reactions? One way is to assume the competitor reacts
in the standard way to a price being set or changed. Another is to assume the competitor treats each
price difference or change as a fresh challenge and reacts according to self-interest at the time. Now
the company will need to research the competitor’s current financial situation, recent sales, customer loyalty, and corporate objectives. If the competitor has a market share objective, it is likely to
match price differences or changes.49 If it has a profit-maximization objective, it may react by increasing its advertising budget or improving product quality.
The problem is complicated because the competitor can put different interpretations on
lowered prices or a price cut: that the company is trying to steal the market, that it is doing
poorly and trying to boost its sales, or that it wants the whole industry to reduce prices to stimulate total demand.

High Price
(No possible
demand at
this price)
Ceiling
price
Customers’
assessment
of unique
product
features
Orienting
point
Competitors’
prices and
prices of
substitutes
Costs
Floor
price
Low Price
(No possible
profit at
this price)

Step 5: Selecting a Pricing Method
Given the customers’ demand schedule, the cost function, and competitors’ prices, the company is
now ready to select a price.
Figure 14.4 summarizes the three major considerations in price
setting: Costs set a floor to the price. Competitors’ prices and the price of substitutes provide an
orienting point. Customers’ assessment of unique features establishes the price ceiling.

|Fig. 14.4|

The Three Cs Model
for Price Setting

396

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Companies select a pricing method that includes one or more of these three considerations. We
will examine six price-setting methods: markup pricing, target-return pricing, perceived-value
pricing, value pricing, going-rate pricing, and auction-type pricing.

MARKUP PRICING The most elementary pricing method is to add a standard markup to the
product’s cost. Construction companies submit job bids by estimating the total project cost and
adding a standard markup for profit. Lawyers and accountants typically price by adding a standard
markup on their time and costs.
$10

Variable cost per unit
Fixed costs

$300,000

Expected unit sales

50,000

Suppose a toaster manufacturer has the following costs and sales expectations:
The manufacturer’s unit cost is given by:
Unit cost = variable cost +

$300,00
fixed cost
= $10 +
= $16
unit sales
50,000

Now assume the manufacturer wants to earn a 20 percent markup on sales. The manufacturer’s markup price is given by:
Markup price =

unit cost
$16
=
= $20
(1 - desired return on sales)
1 - 0.2

The manufacturer will charge dealers $20 per toaster and make a profit of $4 per unit. If dealers
want to earn 50 percent on their selling price, they will mark up the toaster 100 percent to $40.
Markups are generally higher on seasonal items (to cover the risk of not selling), specialty items,
slower-moving items, items with high storage and handling costs, and demand-inelastic items, such
as prescription drugs.
Does the use of standard markups make logical sense? Generally, no. Any pricing method that
ignores current demand, perceived value, and competition is not likely to lead to the optimal price.
Markup pricing works only if the marked-up price actually brings in the expected level of sales.
Consider what happened at Parker Hannifin.

Parker Hannifin

When Donald Washkewicz took over as CEO of Parker
Hannifin, maker of 800,000 industrial parts for the aerospace, transportation, and manufacturing industries, pricing was done one way: Calculate how much it costs to make and
deliver a product and then add a flat percentage (usually 35 percent). Even though this
method was historically well received, Washkewicz set out to get the company to think more
like a retailer and charge what customers were willing to pay. Encountering initial resistance from some
of the company’s 115 different divisions, Washkewicz assembled a list of the 50 most commonly given
reasons why the new pricing scheme would fail and announced he would listen only to arguments that
were not on the list. The new pricing scheme put Parker Hannifin’s products into one of four categories
depending on how much competition existed. About one-third fell into niches where Parker offered
unique value, there was little competition, and higher prices were appropriate. Each division now has a
pricing guru or specialist who assists in strategic pricing. The division making industrial fittings reviewed 2,000 different items and concluded that 28 percent were priced too low, raising prices anywhere from 3 percent to 60 percent.50
Still, markup pricing remains popular. First, sellers can determine costs much more easily than
they can estimate demand. By tying the price to cost, sellers simplify the pricing task. Second, where

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

397

With a stronger focus on customer
value and competitive pressures,
Parker Hannifin was able to simplify its approach to the pricing of
its thousands of products.

all firms in the industry use this pricing method, prices tend to be similar and price competition is
minimized. Third, many people feel that cost-plus pricing is fairer to both buyers and sellers. Sellers
do not take advantage of buyers when the latter’s demand becomes acute, and sellers earn a fair return on investment.

TARGET-RETURN PRICING In target-return pricing, the firm determines the price that
yields its target rate of return on investment. Public utilities, which need to make a fair return on
investment, often use this method.
Suppose the toaster manufacturer has invested $1 million in the business and wants to set a
price to earn a 20 percent ROI, specifically $200,000. The target-return price is given by the following formula:
Target-return price = unit cost +

= $16 +

desired return * invested capital
unit sales

.20 * $1,000,000
= $20
50,000

398

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

1,200

Break-Even Chart for
Determining TargetReturn Price and
Break-Even Volume

1,000
Dollars (in thousands)

|Fig. 14.5|

Total revenue
Target profit

800

Total cost
600

Break-even point

400
Fixed cost
200

0

10

20

30
40
50
Sales Volume in Units (thousands)

The manufacturer will realize this 20 percent ROI provided its costs and estimated sales turn out
to be accurate. But what if sales don’t reach 50,000 units? The manufacturer can prepare a break-even
chart to learn what would happen at other sales levels (see
Figure 14.5). Fixed costs are $300,000
regardless of sales volume. Variable costs, not shown in the figure, rise with volume. Total costs equal
the sum of fixed and variable costs. The total revenue curve starts at zero and rises with each unit sold.
The total revenue and total cost curves cross at 30,000 units. This is the break-even volume. We
can verify it by the following formula:
Break-even volume =

fixed cost
$300,000
= 30,000
=
(price - variable cost)
$20 - $10

The manufacturer, of course, is hoping the market will buy 50,000 units at $20, in which case
it earns $200,000 on its $1 million investment, but much depends on price elasticity and competitors’ prices. Unfortunately, target-return pricing tends to ignore these considerations. The
manufacturer needs to consider different prices and estimate their probable impacts on sales
volume and profits.
The manufacturer should also search for ways to lower its fixed or variable costs, because
lower costs will decrease its required break-even volume. Acer has been gaining share in
the netbook market through rock-bottom prices made possible because of its bare-bones cost
strategy. Acer sells only via retailers and other outlets and outsources all manufacturing and assembly, reducing its overhead to 8 percent of sales versus 14 percent at Dell
and 15 percent at HP.51

PERCEIVED-VALUE PRICING An increasing number of companies now base their price
on the customer’s perceived value. Perceived value is made up of a host of inputs, such as the
buyer’s image of the product performance, the channel deliverables, the warranty quality,
customer support, and softer attributes such as the supplier’s reputation, trustworthiness, and
esteem. Companies must deliver the value promised by their value proposition, and the
customer must perceive this value. Firms use the other marketing program elements, such as
advertising, sales force, and the Internet, to communicate and enhance perceived value in
buyers’ minds.52
Caterpillar uses perceived value to set prices on its construction equipment. It might price its
tractor at $100,000, although a similar competitor’s tractor might be priced at $90,000. When a
prospective customer asks a Caterpillar dealer why he should pay $10,000 more for the Caterpillar
tractor, the dealer answers:

$90,000

is the tractor’s price if it is only equivalent to the competitor’s tractor

$7,000

is the price premium for Caterpillar’s superior durability

$6,000

is the price premium for Caterpillar’s superior reliability

$5,000

is the price premium for Caterpillar’s superior service

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

$2,000

| CHAPTER 14

399

is the price premium for Caterpillar’s longer warranty on parts

$110,000

is the normal price to cover Caterpillar’s superior value

– $10,000

discount

$100,000

final price

The Caterpillar dealer is able to show that although the customer is asked to pay a $10,000 premium, he is actually getting $20,000 extra value! The customer chooses the Caterpillar tractor because he is convinced its lifetime operating costs will be lower.
Ensuring that customers appreciate the total value of a product or service offering is crucial.
Consider the experience of PACCAR.

PACCAR PACCAR Inc., maker of Kenworth and Peterbilt trucks, is able to command
a 10 percent premium through its relentless focus on all aspects of the customer experience to
maximize total value. Contract Freighters trucking company, a
loyal PACCAR customer for 20 years, justified ordering another 700 new trucks, despite their higher price, because of
their higher perceived quality—greater reliability, higher trade-in value,
even the superior plush interiors that might attract better drivers. PACCAR
bucks the commoditization trend by custom-building its trucks to individual specifications. The company invests heavily in technology and can
prototype new parts in hours versus days and weeks, allowing more frequent upgrades. PACCAR was the first to roll out hybrid vehicles in the
fuel-intensive commercial trucking industry (and sell at a premium). The
company generated $1 billion of profit on $15 billion of revenue in
2008—its 70th consecutive year of profitability—bolstered by record
European sales and $2.3 billion in sales of aftermarket parts.53
Even when a company claims its offering delivers more total
value, not all customers will respond positively. Some care only about price. But there is also typically
a segment that cares about quality. The makers of Stag umbrellas in India—umbrellas are essential
in the three months of near-nonstop monsoon rain in cities such as Mumbai—found themselves in
a bitter price war with cheaper Chinese competitors. After realizing they were sacrificing quality too
much, Stag’s managers decided to increase quality with new colors, designs, and features such as
built-in high-power flashlights and prerecorded music. Despite higher prices, sales of the improved
Stag umbrellas actually increased.54
The key to perceived-value pricing is to deliver more unique value than the competitor and to
demonstrate this to prospective buyers. Thus a company needs to fully understand the customer’s
decision-making process. For example, Goodyear found it hard to command a price premium for
its more expensive new tires despite innovative new features to extend tread life. Because consumers had no reference price to compare tires, they tended to gravitate toward the lowest-priced
offerings. Goodyear’s solution was to price its models on expected miles of wear rather than their
technical product features, making product comparisons easier.55
The company can try to determine the value of its offering in several ways: managerial judgments within the company, value of similar products, focus groups, surveys, experimentation,
analysis of historical data, and conjoint analysis.56
Table 14.4 contains six key considerations in
developing value-based pricing.

VALUE PRICING In recent years, several companies have adopted value pricing: They win loyal
customers by charging a fairly low price for a high-quality offering. Value pricing is thus not a

Because of its high standards for
quality and continual innovation,
PACCAR can charge a premium
for its trucks.

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

TABLE 14.4

A Framework of Questions for Practicing Value-Based
Pricing

What is the market strategy for the segment? (What does the supplier want to accomplish? What
would the supplier like to have happen?)
What is the differential value that is transparent to target customers? (Transparent means that target customers easily understand how the supplier calculates the differential value between its
offering and the next best alternative, and that the differential value can be verified with the customer’s own data.)
What is the price of the next best alternative offering?
What is the cost of the supplier’s market offering?
What pricing tactics will be used initially or eventually? (“Pricing tactics” are changes from a price
that a supplier has set for its marketing offering—such as discounts—that motivate customers to
take actions that benefit the supplier.)

1.
2.

3.
4.
5.

What is the customer’s expectation of a “fair” price?

6.

Source: James C. Anderson, Marc Wouters, and Wouter Van Rossum, “Why the Highest Price Isn’t the Best Price,” MIT Sloan Management Review
(Winter 2010), pp. 69–76. © 2006 by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All rights reserved. Distributed by Tribune Media Services.

matter of simply setting lower prices; it is a matter of reengineering the company’s operations to
become a low-cost producer without sacrificing quality, to attract a large number of valueconscious customers.
Among the best practitioners of value pricing are IKEA, Target, and Southwest Airlines. In the
early 1990s, Procter & Gamble created quite a stir when it reduced prices on supermarket staples
such as Pampers and Luvs diapers, liquid Tide detergent, and Folgers coffee to value price them. To
do so, P&G redesigned the way it developed, manufactured, distributed, priced, marketed, and sold
products to deliver better value at every point in the supply chain.57 Its acquisition of Gillette in
2005 for $57 billion (a record five times its sales) brought another brand into its fold that has also
traditionally adopted a value pricing strategy.

Gillette

In 2006, Gillette launched the “best shave on the planet” with the six-bladed
Fusion—five blades in the front for regular shaving and one in the back for trimming—in both
power and nonpower versions. Gillette conducts exhaustive consumer research in designing its
new products and markets aggressively to spread the word. The company spent over $1.2 billion
on research and development after the Fusion’s predecessor, the Mach3, was introduced. About
9,000 men tested potential new products and preferred the new Fusion over the Mach3 by a two-to-one
margin. To back the introduction, Procter & Gamble spent $200 million in the United States and over $1 billion worldwide. The payoff? Gillette enjoys enormous market leadership in the razor and blade categories, with
70 percent of the global market, and sizable price premiums. Refills for the Fusion Power cost $14 for a fourpack, compared to $5.29 for a five-pack of Sensor Excel. All this adds up to significant, sustained profitability
for corporate owner P&G.58
Gillette

400

Value pricing can change the manner by which a company sets prices too. One company that
sold and maintained switch boxes in a variety of sizes for telephone lines found that the probability of failure—and thus maintenance costs—was proportional to the number of switches customers had in their boxes rather than to the dollar value of the installed boxes. The number of
switches could vary in a box, though. Therefore, rather than charging customers based on the total spent on their installation, the company began charging based on the total number of switches
needing servicing.59
An important type of value pricing is everyday low pricing (EDLP). A retailer that holds to an
EDLP pricing policy charges a constant low price with little or no price promotions and special
sales. Constant prices eliminate week-to-week price uncertainty and the “high-low” pricing of

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

401

promotion-oriented competitors. In high-low pricing, the retailer charges higher prices on an
everyday basis but runs frequent promotions with prices temporarily lower than the EDLP level.60
These two strategies have been shown to affect consumer price judgments—deep discounts
(EDLP) can lead customers to perceive lower prices over time than frequent, shallow discounts
(high-low), even if the actual averages are the same.61
In recent years, high-low pricing has given way to EDLP at such widely different venues as
Toyota Scion car dealers and upscale department stores such as Nordstrom, but the king of EDLP is
surely Walmart, which practically defined the term. Except for a few sale items every month,
Walmart promises everyday low prices on major brands.
EDLP provides customer benefits of time and money. Toyota believes its Gen Y target dislikes
haggling because it takes too long. These buyers collect a lot of information online anyway, so
Toyota cut the time to sell Scions from the industry average of 4.5 hours to 45 minutes requiring
fewer managers to approve negotiated prices and less advertising of sales.62 Some retailers base
their entire marketing strategy around extreme everyday low pricing.

Dollar Stores Once-unfashionable “dollar stores” such as Dollar General,
Family Dollar, Big Lots, and Dollar Tree are gaining popularity, partly fueled by an economic
downturn. In 2008, these four biggest players in the category generated $26 billion in sales
with 20,000 stores and gross margins of 35 percent to 40 percent. These ultradiscounters
are not dollar stores in a strict sense of the word—they sell many items over $1, although
most are under $10. They have, however, developed a simple, successful formula for drawing shoppers
from Target and even Walmart: Build small, easy-to-navigate stores in expensive real estate locations
with parking handy; keep overhead low by limiting inventory to mostly inexpensive overstocks, odd lots, and buyouts; and spend sparingly on
store décor and get free word-of-mouth publicity. Because most customers pay in person and in cash, dollar stores can avoid the expense of
processing a lot of credit card purchases and elaborate Internet marketing or supporting a significant e-commerce presence online.63
The most important reason retailers adopt EDLP is that constant sales and promotions are costly and have eroded consumer
confidence in everyday shelf prices. Consumers also have less
time and patience for past traditions like watching for supermarket specials and clipping coupons. Yet, promotions do create
excitement and draw shoppers, so EDLP does not guarantee
success. As supermarkets face heightened competition from their
counterparts and alternative channels, many find the key is a
combination of high-low and everyday low pricing strategies,
with increased advertising and promotions.

GOING-RATE PRICING In going-rate pricing, the firm bases its price largely on competitors’
prices. In oligopolistic industries that sell a commodity such as steel, paper, or fertilizer, all firms
normally charge the same price. Smaller firms “follow the leader,” changing their prices when the
market leader’s prices change rather than when their own demand or costs change. Some may
charge a small premium or discount, but they preserve the difference. Thus minor gasoline retailers
usually charge a few cents less per gallon than the major oil companies, without letting the
difference increase or decrease.
Going-rate pricing is quite popular. Where costs are difficult to measure or competitive response is uncertain, firms feel the going price is a good solution because it is thought to reflect the
industry’s collective wisdom.
AUCTION-TYPE PRICING Auction-type pricing is growing more popular, especially with
scores of electronic marketplaces selling everything from pigs to used cars as firms dispose of excess

Even though not everything it sells
costs less than a dollar, Family
Dollar has become one of the
hottest retailers in recent years.

402

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

inventories or used goods. These are the three major types of auctions and their separate pricing
procedures:
•

English auctions (ascending bids) have one seller and many buyers. On sites such as eBay and
Amazon.com, the seller puts up an item and bidders raise the offer price until the top price is
reached. The highest bidder gets the item. English auctions are used today for selling antiques, cattle, real estate, and used equipment and vehicles. After watching eBay and other ticket brokers,
scalpers, and middlemen reap millions by charging what the market would bear, Ticketmaster has
overhauled the way it sells tickets to try to gain more of the multi-billion-dollar ticket resale industry. It now runs auctions for 30 percent of major music tours including popular artists such as
Christina Aguilera and Madonna and allows some customers to resell their seats on its Web site.64

•

Dutch auctions (descending bids) feature one seller and many buyers, or one buyer and many
sellers. In the first kind, an auctioneer announces a high price for a product and then slowly
decreases the price until a bidder accepts. In the other, the buyer announces something he or
she wants to buy, and potential sellers compete to offer the lowest price. FreeMarkets.com—
later acquired by Ariba—helped Royal Mail Group plc, the United Kingdom’s public mail
service company, save approximately £2.5 million (almost $4 million), in part via an auction
where 25 airlines bid for its international freight business.65

•

Sealed-bid auctions let would-be suppliers submit only one bid; they cannot know the other
bids. The U.S. government often uses this method to procure supplies. A supplier will not bid
below its cost but cannot bid too high for fear of losing the job. The net effect of these two
pulls is the bid’s expected profit.66

To buy equipment for its drug researchers, Pfizer uses reverse auctions in which suppliers submit online the lowest price they are willing to be paid. If the increased savings a firm obtains in an
online auction translates into decreased margins for an incumbent supplier, however, the supplier
may feel the firm is opportunistically squeezing out price concessions.67 Online auctions with a
large number of bidders, greater economic stakes, and less visibility in pricing result in greater
overall satisfaction, more positive future expectations, and fewer perceptions of opportunism.

Step 6: Selecting the Final Price
Pricing methods narrow the range from which the company must select its final price. In selecting that
price, the company must consider additional factors, including the impact of other marketing activities, company pricing policies, gain-and-risk-sharing pricing, and the impact of price on other parties.

IMPACT OF OTHER MARKETING ACTIVITIES The final price must take into account the
brand’s quality and advertising relative to the competition. In a classic study, Paul Farris and David
Reibstein examined the relationships among relative price, relative quality, and relative advertising
for 227 consumer businesses and found the following:68
•

Brands with average relative quality but high relative advertising budgets could charge premium
prices. Consumers were willing to pay higher prices for known rather than for unknown products.

•

Brands with high relative quality and high relative advertising obtained the highest prices.
Conversely, brands with low quality and low advertising charged the lowest prices.

•

For market leaders, the positive relationship between high prices and high advertising held
most strongly in the later stages of the product life cycle.
These findings suggest that price is not necessarily as important as quality and other benefits.

COMPANY PRICING POLICIES The price must be consistent with company pricing policies.
Yet companies are not averse to establishing pricing penalties under certain circumstances.69
Airlines charge $150 to those who change their reservations on discount tickets. Banks charge fees
for too many withdrawals in a month or early withdrawal of a certificate of deposit. Dentists, hotels,
car rental companies, and other service providers charge penalties for no-shows who miss appointments or reservations. Although these policies are often justifiable, marketers must use them judiciously and not unnecessarily alienate customers. (See “Marketing Insight: Stealth Price Increases.”)
Many companies set up a pricing department to develop policies and establish or approve
decisions. The aim is to ensure that salespeople quote prices that are reasonable to customers and
profitable to the company.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

Marketing Insight
Stealth Price Increases
With consumers resisting higher prices, companies are trying to figure
out how to increase revenue without really raising prices. They often resort to adding fees for once-free features. Although some consumers
abhor “nickel-and-dime” pricing strategies, small additional charges
can add up to a substantial source of revenue.
The numbers can be staggering. The telecommunications industry
has been aggressive at adding fees for setup, change-of-service, service termination, directory assistance, regulatory assessment, number
portability, and cable hookup and equipment, costing consumers billions
of dollars. Fees for consumers who pay bills online, bounce checks, or
use automated teller machines bring banks billions of dollars annually.
When credit card companies were faced with a set of reforms in
2009 to some of their most reviled practices—including abrupt interest
rate changes and late payment fees—they responded with new ways to
raise revenue, such as rate floors for variable rate cards, higher penalty

| CHAPTER 14

403

fees for overdue payments at lower balance thresholds, and inactivity
fees for not using cards.
This explosion of fees has a number of implications. Given that list
prices stay fixed, they may understate inflation. They also make it harder
for consumers to compare competitive offerings. Although various citizens’ groups have tried to pressure companies to roll back some of
these fees, they don’t always get a sympathetic ear from state and local
governments, which have been guilty of using their own array of fees,
fines, and penalties to raise necessary revenue.
Companies justify the extra fees as the only fair and viable way to
cover expenses without losing customers. Many argue that it makes sense
to charge a premium for added services that cost more to provide, rather
than charging all customers the same amount whether or not they use the
extra service. Breaking out charges and fees according to the related services is a way to keep basic costs low. Companies also use fees as a means
to weed out unprofitable customers or get them to change their behavior.
Ultimately, the viability of extra fees will be decided in the marketplace, and by the willingness of consumers to vote with their wallets and
pay the fees, or vote with their feet and move on.
Sources: Alexis Leondis and Jeff Plungis, “The Latest Credit Card Tricks,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, December 28, 2009 & January 4, 2010, p. 95; Brian
Burnsed, “A New Front in the Credit Card Wars,” BusinessWeek, November 9,
2009, p. 60; Kathy Chu, “Credit Card Fees Can Suck You In,” USA Today,
December 15, 2006; Michael Arndt, “Fees! Fees! Fees!” BusinessWeek,
September 29, 2003, pp. 99–104; “The Price Is Wrong,” Economist, May 25,
2002, pp. 59–60.

GAIN-AND-RISK-SHARING PRICING Buyers may resist accepting a seller’s proposal
because of a high perceived level of risk. The seller has the option of offering to absorb part or all
the risk if it does not deliver the full promised value. Some recent risk-sharing applications include
big computer hardware purchases and health plans for big unions.
Baxter Healthcare, a leading medical products firm, was able to secure a contract for an information
management system from Columbia/HCA, a leading health care provider, by guaranteeing the firm several million dollars in savings over an eight-year period. An increasing number of companies, especially
business marketers who promise great savings with their equipment, may have to stand ready to guarantee the promised savings but also participate in the upside if the gains are much greater than expected.

IMPACT OF PRICE ON OTHER PARTIES How will distributors and dealers feel about the
contemplated price?70 If they don’t make enough profit, they may choose not to bring the product
to market. Will the sales force be willing to sell at that price? How will competitors react? Will
suppliers raise their prices when they see the company’s price? Will the government intervene and
prevent this price from being charged?
U.S. legislation states that sellers must set prices without talking to competitors: Price-fixing is
illegal. Many federal and state statutes protect consumers against deceptive pricing practices. For
example, it is illegal for a company to set artificially high “regular” prices, then announce a “sale” at
prices close to previous everyday prices.

Adapting the Price
Companies usually do not set a single price but rather develop a pricing structure that reflects variations in geographical demand and costs, market-segment requirements, purchase timing, order
levels, delivery frequency, guarantees, service contracts, and other factors. As a result of discounts,
allowances, and promotional support, a company rarely realizes the same profit from each unit of a

404

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

product that it sells. Here we will examine several price-adaptation strategies: geographical pricing,
price discounts and allowances, promotional pricing, and differentiated pricing.

Geographical Pricing (Cash, Countertrade, Barter)
In geographical pricing, the company decides how to price its products to different customers in
different locations and countries. Should the company charge higher prices to distant customers to
cover the higher shipping costs, or a lower price to win additional business? How should it account
for exchange rates and the strength of different currencies?
Another question is how to get paid. This issue is critical when buyers lack sufficient hard currency to pay for their purchases. Many buyers want to offer other items in payment, a practice
known as countertrade. U.S. companies are often forced to engage in countertrade if they want the
business. Countertrade may account for 15 percent to 20 percent of world trade and takes several
forms:71
•
•

•

•

Barter. The buyer and seller directly exchange goods, with no money and no third party involved.
Compensation deal. The seller receives some percentage of the payment in cash and the rest
in products. A British aircraft manufacturer sold planes to Brazil for 70 percent cash and the
rest in coffee.
Buyback arrangement. The seller sells a plant, equipment, or technology to another country
and agrees to accept as partial payment products manufactured with the supplied equipment.
A U.S. chemical company built a plant for an Indian company and accepted partial payment in
cash and the remainder in chemicals manufactured at the plant.
Offset. The seller receives full payment in cash but agrees to spend a substantial amount of the
money in that country within a stated time period. PepsiCo sold its cola syrup to Russia for
rubles and agreed to buy Russian vodka at a certain rate for sale in the United States.

Price Discounts and Allowances
Most companies will adjust their list price and give discounts and allowances for early payment,
volume purchases, and off-season buying (see
Table 14.5).72 Companies must do this carefully
or find that their profits are much lower than planned.73

TABLE 14.5

Price Discounts and Allowances

Discount:

A price reduction to buyers who pay bills promptly. A typical example is
“2/10, net 30,” which means that payment is due within 30 days and that
the buyer can deduct 2 percent by paying the bill within 10 days.

Quantity Discount:

A price reduction to those who buy large volumes. A typical example is
“$10 per unit for fewer than 100 units; $9 per unit for 100 or more units.”
Quantity discounts must be offered equally to all customers and must not
exceed the cost savings to the seller. They can be offered on each order
placed or on the number of units ordered over a given period.

Functional
Discount:

Discount (also called trade discount) offered by a manufacturer to tradechannel members if they will perform certain functions, such as selling,
storing, and record keeping. Manufacturers must offer the same functional
discounts within each channel.

Seasonal Discount:

A price reduction to those who buy merchandise or services out of season.
Hotels, motels, and airlines offer seasonal discounts in slow selling periods.

Allowance:

An extra payment designed to gain reseller participation in special programs. Trade-in allowances are granted for turning in an old item when
buying a new one. Promotional allowances reward dealers for participating
in advertising and sales support programs.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

Discount pricing has become the modus operandi of a surprising number of companies offering both products and services. Salespeople, in particular, are quick to give discounts in order to
close a sale. But word can get around fast that the company’s list price is “soft,” and discounting becomes the norm, undermining the value perceptions of the offerings. Some product categories selfdestruct by always being on sale.
Some companies with overcapacity are tempted to give discounts or even begin to supply a retailer with a store-brand version of their product at a deep discount. Because the store brand is
priced lower, however, it may start making inroads on the manufacturer’s brand. Manufacturers
should consider the implications of supplying retailers at a discount, because they may end up losing long-run profits in an effort to meet short-run volume goals.
Only people with higher incomes and higher product involvement willingly pay more for features, customer service, quality, added convenience, and the brand name. So it can be a mistake for
a strong, distinctive brand to plunge into price discounting to respond to low-price attacks. At the
same time, discounting can be a useful tool if a company can gain concessions in return, such as the
customer agreeing to sign a longer contract, order electronically, or buy in truckload quantities.
Sales management needs to monitor the proportion of customers receiving discounts, the average discount, and any salespeople over-relying on discounting. Higher levels of management
should conduct a net price analysis to arrive at the “real price” of the offering. The real price is affected not only by discounts, but by other expenses that reduce the realized price (see “Promotional
Pricing”). Suppose the company’s list price is $3,000. The average discount is $300. The company’s
promotional spending averages $450 (15 percent of the list price). Retailers are given co-op advertising money of $150 to back the product. The company’s net price is $2,100, not $3,000.

Promotional Pricing
Companies can use several pricing techniques to stimulate early purchase:
•

•
•

•

•
•

•
•

Loss-leader pricing. Supermarkets and department stores often drop the price on wellknown brands to stimulate additional store traffic. This pays if the revenue on the additional
sales compensates for the lower margins on the loss-leader items. Manufacturers of loss-leader
brands typically object because this practice can dilute the brand image and bring complaints
from retailers who charge the list price. Manufacturers have tried to keep intermediaries from
using loss-leader pricing through lobbying for retail-price-maintenance laws, but these laws
have been revoked.
Special event pricing. Sellers will establish special prices in certain seasons to draw in more
customers. Every August, there are back-to-school sales.
Special customer pricing. Sellers will offer special prices exclusively to certain customers.
Road Runner Sports offers members of its Run America Club “exclusive” online offers with
price discounts twice those for regular customers.74
Cash rebates. Auto companies and other consumer-goods companies offer cash rebates to
encourage purchase of the manufacturers’ products within a specified time period. Rebates
can help clear inventories without cutting the stated list price.
Low-interest financing. Instead of cutting its price, the company can offer customers lowinterest financing. Automakers have used no-interest financing to try to attract more customers.
Longer payment terms. Sellers, especially mortgage banks and auto companies, stretch
loans over longer periods and thus lower the monthly payments. Consumers often worry
less about the cost (the interest rate) of a loan, and more about whether they can afford the
monthly payment.
Warranties and service contracts. Companies can promote sales by adding a free or low-cost
warranty or service contract.
Psychological discounting. This strategy sets an artificially high price and then offers the
product at substantial savings; for example, “Was $359, now $299.” Discounts from normal
prices are a legitimate form of promotional pricing; the Federal Trade Commission and Better
Business Bureaus fight illegal discount tactics.

Promotional-pricing strategies are often a zero-sum game. If they work, competitors copy them
and they lose their effectiveness. If they don’t work, they waste money that could have been put into
other marketing tools, such as building up product quality and service or strengthening product
image through advertising.

| CHAPTER 14

405

406

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Differentiated Pricing
Companies often adjust their basic price to accommodate differences in customers, products, locations, and so on. Lands’ End creates men’s shirts in many different styles, weights, and levels of
quality. As of January 2010, a men’s white button-down shirt could cost as little as $14.99 or as
much as $79.50.75
Price discrimination occurs when a company sells a product or service at two or more prices
that do not reflect a proportional difference in costs. In first-degree price discrimination, the seller
charges a separate price to each customer depending on the intensity of his or her demand.
In second-degree price discrimination, the seller charges less to buyers of larger volumes. With
certain services such as cell phone service, however, tiered pricing results in consumers paying more
with higher levels of usage. With the iPhone, 3 percent of users accounted for 40 percent of the traffic on AT&T’s network, resulting in costly network upgrades.76
In third-degree price discrimination, the seller charges different amounts to different classes of
buyers, as in the following cases:
•

•

•

•
•

•

Customer-segment pricing. Different customer groups pay different prices for the same
product or service. For example, museums often charge a lower admission fee to students and
senior citizens.
Product-form pricing. Different versions of the product are priced differently, but not
proportionately to their costs. Evian prices a 48-ounce bottle of its mineral water at $2.00 and
1.7 ounces of the same water in a moisturizer spray at $6.00.
Image pricing. Some companies price the same product at two different levels based on image
differences. A perfume manufacturer can put the perfume in one bottle, give it a name and image, and price it at $10 an ounce. The same perfume in another bottle with a different name
and image and price can sell for $30 an ounce.
Channel pricing. Coca-Cola carries a different price depending on whether the consumer
purchases it in a fine restaurant, a fast-food restaurant, or a vending machine.
Location pricing. The same product is priced differently at different locations even though
the cost of offering it at each location is the same. A theater varies its seat prices according to
audience preferences for different locations.
Time pricing. Prices are varied by season, day, or hour. Public utilities vary energy rates to
commercial users by time of day and weekend versus weekday. Restaurants charge less to “early
bird” customers, and some hotels charge less on weekends.

The airline and hospitality industries use yield management systems and yield pricing, by
which they offer discounted but limited early purchases, higher-priced late purchases, and the lowest rates on unsold inventory just before it expires.77 Airlines charge different fares to passengers on
the same flight, depending on the seating class; the time of day (morning or night coach); the day
of the week (workday or weekend); the season; the person’s employer, past business, or status
(youth, military, senior citizen); and so on.
That’s why on a flight from New York City to Miami you might pay $200 and sit across from
someone who paid $1,290. Continental Airlines launches 2,000 flights a day and each has between
10 and 20 prices. The carrier starts booking flights 330 days in advance, and every flying day is different from every other flying day. At any given moment the market has more than 7 million prices.
And in a system that tracks the difference in prices and the price of competitors’ offerings, airlines
collectively charge 75,000 different prices a day! It’s a system designed to punish procrastinators by
charging them the highest possible prices.
The phenomenon of offering different pricing schedules to different consumers and dynamically adjusting prices is exploding.78 Many companies are using software packages that provide
real-time controlled tests of actual consumer response to different pricing schedules. Constant
price variation can be tricky, however, where consumer relationships are concerned. Research
shows it’s most effective when there’s no bond between the buyer and the seller. One way to make it
work is to offer customers a unique bundle of products and services to meet their needs precisely,
making it harder to make price comparisons.
The tactic most companies favor, however, is to use variable prices as a reward rather than a
penalty. For instance, shipping company APL rewards customers who can better predict how much
cargo space they’ll need with cheaper rates for booking early. Customers are also getting savvier
about how to avoid buyer’s remorse from overpaying. They are changing their buying behavior to

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

| CHAPTER 14

407

The likelihood is extremely high
that every passenger shown in this
airport lobby is paying a different
price, even if they are all on the
same flight.

accommodate the new realities of dynamic pricing—where prices vary frequently by channels,
products, customers, and time.
Most consumers are probably not even aware of the degree to which they are the targets of discriminatory pricing. For instance, catalog retailers such as Victoria’s Secret routinely send out catalogs that sell identical goods at different prices. Consumers who live in a more free-spending zip
code may see only the higher prices. Office product superstore Staples also sends out office supply
catalogs with different prices.
Although some forms of price discrimination (in which sellers offer different price terms to different people within the same trade group) are illegal, price discrimination is legal if the seller can
prove its costs are different when selling different volumes or different qualities of the same product to different retailers. Predatory pricing—selling below cost with the intention of destroying
competition—is unlawful, though.79
For price discrimination to work, certain conditions must exist. First, the market must be segmentable and the segments must show different intensities of demand. Second, members in the
lower-price segment must not be able to resell the product to the higher-price segment. Third,
competitors must not be able to undersell the firm in the higher-price segment. Fourth, the cost of
segmenting and policing the market must not exceed the extra revenue derived from price discrimination. Fifth, the practice must not breed customer resentment and ill will. Sixth, of course, the
particular form of price discrimination must not be illegal.80

Initiating and Responding to Price
Changes
Companies often need to cut or raise prices.

Initiating Price Cuts
Several circumstances might lead a firm to cut prices. One is excess plant capacity: The firm needs
additional business and cannot generate it through increased sales effort, product improvement, or
other measures. Companies sometimes initiate price cuts in a drive to dominate the market through
lower costs. Either the company starts with lower costs than its competitors, or it initiates price cuts
in the hope of gaining market share and lower costs.

408

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Cutting prices to keep customers or beat competitors often encourages customers to demand
price concessions, however, and trains salespeople to offer them.81 A price-cutting strategy can lead
to other possible traps:
•
•
•
•

Low-quality trap. Consumers assume quality is low.
Fragile-market-share trap. A low price buys market share but not market loyalty. The same
customers will shift to any lower-priced firm that comes along.
Shallow-pockets trap. Higher-priced competitors match the lower prices but have longer
staying power because of deeper cash reserves.
Price-war trap. Competitors respond by lowering their prices even more, triggering a price war.82

Customers often question the motivation behind price changes.83 They may assume the item is
about to be replaced by a new model; the item is faulty and is not selling well; the firm is in financial trouble; the price will come down even further; or the quality has been reduced. The firm must
monitor these attributions carefully.

Initiating Price Increases
A successful price increase can raise profits considerably. If the company’s profit margin is 3 percent of
sales, a 1 percent price increase will increase profits by 33 percent if sales volume is unaffected. This situation is illustrated in
Table 14.6. The assumption is that a company charged $10 and sold 100 units
and had costs of $970, leaving a profit of $30, or 3 percent on sales. By raising its price by 10 cents (a
1 percent price increase), it boosted its profits by 33 percent, assuming the same sales volume.
A major circumstance provoking price increases is cost inflation. Rising costs unmatched by productivity gains squeeze profit margins and lead companies to regular rounds of price increases.
Companies often raise their prices by more than the cost increase, in anticipation of further inflation or government price controls, in a practice called anticipatory pricing.
Another factor leading to price increases is overdemand. When a company cannot supply all its
customers, it can raise its prices, ration supplies, or both. It can increase price in the following ways,
each of which has a different impact on buyers.
•

•

•

•

Delayed quotation pricing. The company does not set a final price until the product is finished or delivered. This pricing is prevalent in industries with long production lead times, such
as industrial construction and heavy equipment.
Escalator clauses. The company requires the customer to pay today’s price and all or part of
any inflation increase that takes place before delivery. An escalator clause bases price increases
on some specified price index. Escalator clauses are found in contracts for major industrial
projects, such as aircraft construction and bridge building.
Unbundling. The company maintains its price but removes or prices separately one or more
elements that were part of the former offer, such as free delivery or installation. Car companies
sometimes add higher-end audio entertainment systems or GPS navigation systems as extras
to their vehicles.
Reduction of discounts. The company instructs its sales force not to offer its normal cash and
quantity discounts.

TABLE 14.6

Profits Before and After a Price Increase
Before

After

Price

$10

$10.10

Units sold

100

100

Revenue

$1,000

$1,010

Costs

–970

–970

Profit

$30

$40

(a 1% price increase)

(a 33 1/3% profit increase)

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

Although there is always a chance a price increase can carry some positive meanings to
customers—for example, that the item is “hot” and represents an unusually good value—consumers
generally dislike higher prices. In passing price increases on to customers, the company must avoid
looking like a price gouger.84 Coca-Cola’s proposed smart vending machines that would raise prices
as temperatures rose and Amazon.com’s dynamic pricing experiment that varied prices by purchase
occasion both became front-page news. The more similar the products or offerings from a company,
the more likely consumers are to interpret any pricing differences as unfair. Product customization
and differentiation and communications that clarify differences are thus critical.85
Generally, consumers prefer small price increases on a regular basis to sudden, sharp increases.
Their memories are long, and they can turn against companies they perceive as price gougers. Price
hikes without corresponding investments in the value of the brand increase vulnerability to lowerpriced competition. Consumers may be willing to “trade down” because they can no longer convince themselves the higher-priced brand is worth it.
Several techniques help consumers avoid sticker shock and a hostile reaction when prices
rise: One is maintaining a sense of fairness around any price increase, such as by giving
customers advance notice so they can do forward buying or shop around. Sharp price increases
need to be explained in understandable terms. Making low-visibility price moves first is also a
good technique: Eliminating discounts, increasing minimum order sizes, and curtailing
production of low-margin products are examples, and contracts or bids for long-term projects
should contain escalator clauses based on such factors as increases in recognized national price
indexes.86
Given strong consumer resistance, marketers go to great lengths to find alternate approaches that avoid increasing prices when they otherwise would have done so. Here are a few
popular ones.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Shrinking the amount of product instead of raising the price. (Hershey Foods maintained its
candy bar price but trimmed its size. Nestlé maintained its size but raised the price.)
Substituting less-expensive materials or ingredients. (Many candy bar companies substituted
synthetic chocolate for real chocolate to fight cocoa price increases.)
Reducing or removing product features. (Sears engineered down a number of its appliances so
they could be priced competitively with those sold in discount stores.)
Removing or reducing product services, such as installation or free delivery.
Using less-expensive packaging material or larger package sizes.
Reducing the number of sizes and models offered.
Creating new economy brands. (Jewel food stores introduced 170 generic items selling at
10 percent to 30 percent less than national brands.)

Responding to Competitors’ Price Changes
How should a firm respond to a competitor’s price cut? In general, the best response varies
with the situation. The company must consider the product’s stage in the life cycle, its importance in the company’s portfolio, the competitor’s intentions and resources, the market’s price
and quality sensitivity, the behavior of costs with volume, and the company’s alternative
opportunities.
In markets characterized by high product homogeneity, the firm can search for ways to enhance its augmented product. If it cannot find any, it may need to meet the price reduction. If the
competitor raises its price in a homogeneous product market, other firms might not match it if
the increase will not benefit the industry as a whole. Then the leader will need to roll back the
increase.
In nonhomogeneous product markets, a firm has more latitude. It needs to consider the following issues: (1) Why did the competitor change the price? To steal the market, to utilize excess
capacity, to meet changing cost conditions, or to lead an industry-wide price change? (2) Does
the competitor plan to make the price change temporary or permanent? (3) What will happen
to the company’s market share and profits if it does not respond? Are other companies going to
respond? (4) What are the competitors’ and other firms’ responses likely to be to each possible
reaction?
Market leaders often face aggressive price cutting by smaller firms trying to build market share.
Using price, Fuji has attacked Kodak, Schick has attacked Gillette, and AMD has attacked Intel.

| CHAPTER 14

409

410

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

Brand leaders also face lower-priced store brands. Three possible responses to low-cost competitors
are: (1) further differentiate the product or service, (2) introduce a low-cost venture, or (3) reinvent
as a low-cost player.87 The right strategy depends on the ability of the firm to generate more demand or cut costs.
An extended analysis of alternatives may not always be feasible when the attack occurs. The
company may have to react decisively within hours or days, especially where prices change with
some frequency and it is important to react quickly, such as the meatpacking, lumber, or oil industries. It would make better sense to anticipate possible competitors’ price changes and prepare contingent responses.

Summary
1. Despite the increased role of nonprice factors in modern marketing, price remains a critical element of
marketing. Price is the only element that produces
revenue; the others produce costs. Pricing decisions
have become more challenging, however, in a changing
economic and technological environment.
2. In setting pricing policy, a company follows a six-step
procedure. It selects its pricing objective. It estimates the
demand curve, the probable quantities it will sell at each
possible price. It estimates how its costs vary at different
levels of output, at different levels of accumulated production experience, and for differentiated marketing offers. It examines competitors’ costs, prices, and offers. It
selects a pricing method, and it selects the final price.
3. Companies usually set not a single price, but rather a
pricing structure that reflects variations in geographical
demand and costs, market-segment requirements, purchase timing, order levels, and other factors. Several
price-adaptation strategies are available: (1) geographical
pricing, (2) price discounts and allowances, (3) promotional pricing, and (4) discriminatory pricing.

4. Firms often need to change their prices. A price
decrease might be brought about by excess plant
capacity, declining market share, a desire to dominate the market through lower costs, or economic
recession. A price increase might be brought about
by cost inflation or overdemand. Companies must
carefully manage customer perceptions when raising
prices.
5. Companies must anticipate competitor price changes
and prepare contingent responses. A number of responses are possible in terms of maintaining or changing price or quality.
6. The firm facing a competitor’s price change must try to
understand the competitor’s intent and the likely duration of the change. Strategy often depends on whether
a firm is producing homogeneous or nonhomogeneous
products. A market leader attacked by lower-priced
competitors can seek to better differentiate itself, introduce its own low-cost competitor, or transform itself
more completely.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is the Right Price a Fair Price?

Marketing Discussion
Pricing Methods

Prices are often set to satisfy demand or to reflect the premium that consumers are willing to pay for a product or
service. Some critics shudder, however, at the thought of
$2 bottles of water, $150 running shoes, and $500 concert
tickets.
Take a position: Prices should reflect the value
consumers are willing to pay versus Prices should reflect only the cost of making a product or delivering a
service.

Think about the pricing methods described in this
chapter—markup pricing, target-return pricing, perceivedvalue pricing, value pricing, going-rate pricing, and
auction-type pricing. As a consumer, which do you prefer
to deal with? Why? If the average price were to stay the
same, which would you prefer a firm to do: (1) set one
price and not deviate or (2) employ slightly higher prices
most of the year but offer slightly discounted prices or specials for certain occasions?

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

Marketing Excellence

>>eBay

In 1995, Pierre Omidayar, a French-Iranian immigrant,
wrote the code for an auction Web site where everyone
would have equal access to a single global marketplace.
Omidayar couldn’t believe it when a collector bought the
first item, a broken laser pointer, for $14.83.* Soon the
site grew into a broader auction site where consumers
could auction collectibles such as baseball cards and
Barbie dolls. The momentum continued when individuals
and small businesses discovered that eBay was an efficient way to reach new consumers and other businesses.
Large companies began using eBay as a means of selling
their bulk lots of unsold inventory. Today, people can buy
and sell virtually any product or service, on the world’s
largest online marketplace. From appliances and computers to cars and real estate, sellers can list anything as long
as it is not illegal or violates eBay’s rules and policies.
eBay’s success truly created a pricing revolution by allowing buyers to determine what they would pay for an
item; the result pleases both sides because customers gain
control and receive the best possible price while sellers
make good margins due to the site’s efficiency and wide
reach. For years, buyers and sellers used eBay as an
informal guide to market value. Even a company with a newproduct design that wanted to know the going price for anything from a copier to a new DVD player checked on eBay.
eBay has evolved to also offer a fixed-price “buy it
now” option to those who don’t want to wait for an auction
and are willing to pay the seller’s price. Sellers can also use
the fixed price format with a “best offer” option that allows
the seller to counteroffer, reject, or accept an offer.
The impact of eBay’s global reach is significant. In 2009,
over $60 billion worth of goods was sold on eBay—that’s
almost $2,000 worth every second. The site has 405 million

| CHAPTER 14

411

registered and 90 million active users and receives 81 million
unique visitors a month. More than 1 million members make
their living from the site. Yet eBay itself doesn’t buy any inventory or own the products on its site. It earns its money by
collecting fees: an insertion fee for each listing plus a finalvalue fee based on the auction or fixed price. For example, if
an item sells for $60.00, the seller pays 8.75 percent on the
first $25.00 ($2.19) plus 3.5 percent on the remaining $35.00
($1.23). Therefore, the final-value fee for the sale is $3.42.
This pricing structure was developed to attract high-volume
sellers and deter those who list only a few low-priced items.
With eBay’s expansion into a wide range of other categories—from boats and cars and travel and tickets to health
and beauty and home and garden—collectibles now make
up only a small percentage of eBay sales.
eBay’s business model is based on connecting individuals who otherwise would not be connected. It was the first
example of online social networking, years before Twitter
and Facebook existed, and consumer trust is a key element
of its success. While skeptics initially questioned whether
consumers would buy products from strangers, Omidayar
believed people are innately good, and eBay’s originators
did two things well: they worked hard to make their Web
site a community, and they developed tools to help reinforce
trust between strangers. The company tracks and publishes the reputations of both buyers and sellers on the basis of feedback from each transaction. eBay extended its
feedback service in 2007 by adding four different seller categories: items as described, communication, shipping time,
and shipping and handling rate. The ratings are anonymous
but visible to other buyers. Sellers with the highest rankings
appear at the top of search results.
eBay’s millions of passionate users also have a voice
in all major decisions the company makes through its
Voice of the Customer program. Every few months, eBay
brings in as many as a dozen sellers and buyers and asks
them questions about how they work and what else eBay
needs to do. At least twice a week the company holds
hour-long teleconferences to poll users on almost every
new feature or policy. The result is that users (eBay’s customers) feel like owners, and they have taken the initiative
to expand the company into ever-new territory.
eBay continues to expand its capabilities to build its
community and connect people around the world by
adding services, partnerships, and investments. The
company acquired PayPal, an online payment service, in
2002 after eBay members made it clear that PayPal was
the preferred method of payment. The acquisition lowered currency and language barriers and allowed
merchants to easily sell products around the world.
eBay also acquired Skype Internet voice and video

*Some falsely believe that eBay was created to help Omidayar’s girlfriend find and collect Pez candy dispensers. That story, however, was created
by an employee to help generate initial interest in the company.

412

PART 5

SHAPING THE MARKET OFFERINGS

communication service in 2005, which allowed buyers
and sellers to communicate over voice or video free and
generated additional ad revenue for eBay. However, in
2009 eBay sold a majority stake in Skype to focus more
on its e-commerce and payments businesses, leading
the company to acquire Shopping.com, StubHub, Bill
Me Later, and others. eBay now has a presence in 39
markets around the world.
Although eBay was a darling in the dot-com boom
and has achieved tremendous success since then, it is
not without challenges. These include a worldwide recession, increased competition from Google, and difficulties as it expands globally into tough markets such as
China. Its CEO, Meg Whitman, retired in 2008 after leading the company for 10 years and was replaced by John
Donahue. Under its new leadership, the company continues to focus on one of its founding beliefs: a strong
commitment to and investment in technologies that help
people connect. Recent efforts to adopt mobile applications, integrate with iPhones, and become more green

have helped take the company to the top of such lists
such as Newsweek’s Greenest Companies in America
and Fortunes 100 Best Companies to Work For in backto-back years.

Marketing Excellence

communication efforts, Southwest uses humor to poke
fun at itself and convey its warm, friendly personality. One
TV spot showed a small bag of peanuts with the words,
“This is what our meals look like at Southwest Airlines. . . .
It’s also what our fares look like.” Its ongoing “Wanna Get
Away?” campaign uses embarrassing situations to hit a
funny bone with consumers. And its tagline: “Ding! You
are now free to move around the country” is a self-parody
of its in-flight announcements. This lighthearted attitude
carries over to the entertaining on-board announcements,
crews that burst into song in the terminal, and several
personalized aircrafts, including three painted as flying
killer whales, “Lone Star One” painted like the Texas flag,
and “Slam Dunk One,” symbolizing the airline’s partnership with the NBA.
Southwest’s business model is based on streamlining
its operations, which results in low fares and satisfied consumers. The airline takes several steps to save money and
passes the savings to customers through low fares. It flies
over 3,100 short, “point-to-point” trips in a day—shuttling
more passengers per plane than any other airline. Each
aircraft makes an average of 6.25 flights a day, or almost
12 hours each day. Southwest can accomplish such a feat
because it avoids the traditional hub-and-spoke system
and has extremely fast turnaround service. In its early
years, it turned planes around in less than 10 minutes.
Today, its turnaround averages 20 to 30 minutes—still the
best in the industry and half the industry average.
Southwest’s unique boarding process helps. Instead of
assigned seating, passengers are assigned to one of three

>>Southwest Airlines

Southwest Airlines entered the airline industry in 1971
with little money but lots of personality. Marketing itself as
the LUV airline, the company featured a bright red heart
as its first logo and relied on outrageous antics to generate word of mouth and new business. Flight attendants in
red-orange hot pants served Love Bites (peanuts) and
Love Potions (drinks).
As Southwest grew, its advertising showcased its focus on low fares, frequent flights, on-time arrivals, top
safety record, and how bags fly free. Throughout all its

Questions
1. Why has eBay succeeded as an online auction marketplace while so many others have failed?
2. Evaluate eBay’s fee structure. Is it optimal or could it
be improved? Why? How?
3. What’s next for eBay? How does it continue to grow
when it needs both buyers and sellers? Where will
this growth come from?
Sources: Douglas MacMillan, “Can eBay Get Its Tech Savvy Back?” BusinessWeek, June 22, 2009,
pp. 48–49; Cattherine Holahan, “eBay’s New Tough Love CEO,” BusinessWeek, February 4, 2008,
pp. 58–59; Adam Lashinsky, “Building eBay 2.0,” Fortune, October 16, 2006, pp. 161–64;
Matthew Creamer, “A Million Marketers,” Advertising Age, June 26, 2006, pp. 1, 71; Clive
Thompson, “eBay Heads East,” Fast Company (July–August 2006): 87–89; Glen L. Urban, “The
Emerging Era of Customer Advocacy,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Winter 2004): 77–82;
www.ebay.com.

DEVELOPING PRICING STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

groups (A, B, C) and a number when they check in. The
number refers to where they stand in line at the gate.
Group A boards first, and once on board, passengers may
sit anywhere they like.
Southwest grows by entering new markets other airlines overprice and underserve. The company believes
it can bring fares down by one-third to one-half whenever
it enters a new market, and it expands every market it
serves by making flying affordable to people who could
not afford it before. Southwest currently serves 68 cities in
35 states, usually secondary cities with smaller airports
that have lower gate fees and less congestion—another
factor that leads to faster turnaround and lower fares.
Another unique cost savings strategy is Southwest’s
decision to operate Boeing 737s for all its flights. This
simplifies the training process for pilots, flight attendants,
and mechanics, and management can substitute aircraft,
reschedule flight crews, or transfer mechanics quickly.
Jet fuel is an airline’s biggest expense. According to
the industry’s trade group, Air Transport Association, jet
fuel now accounts for 40 percent of an airplane ticket
versus 15 percent just eight years ago. Southwest’s
biggest cost savings technique and competitive advantage has long been its program to hedge fuel prices by
purchasing options years in advance. Many of its longterm contracts allow the airline to purchase fuel at $51
per barrel, a significant savings especially during the oil
shocks of the 2000s that drove oil past $100 per barrel.
Analysts estimate that Southwest has saved more than
$2 billion with fuel hedging.
Because lighter planes use less fuel, Southwest makes
its planes lighter by, for instance, power-washing their jet
engines to remove dirt each night. It carries less water for
bathrooms and has replaced its seats with lighter models.
Southwest consumes approximately 1.5 billion gallons of
jet fuel each year so every minor change adds up. The
airline estimates that these changes saved $1.6 million in
fuel costs over just three months.
Southwest has pioneered services and programs
such as same-day freight service, senior discounts, Fun
Fares, and Ticketless Travel. It was the first airline with a
Web site, the first to deliver live updates on ticket deals,
and the first to post a blog. Despite its reputation for low
fares and no-frills service, Southwest wins the hearts of
customers. It consistently ranks at the top of lists of

| CHAPTER 14

413

customer service for airlines and receives the lowest ratio
of complaints per passenger.
Southwest has been ranked by Fortune magazine as
the United States’ most admired airline since 1997, the
fifth-most admired corporation in 2007, and one of the
top five best places to work. Its financial results also
shine: the company has been profitable for 37 straight
years. It has been the only airline to report profits every
quarter since September 11, 2001, and one of the few
with no layoffs amid a travel slump created by the slow
economy and the threat of terrorism.
Although the hot pants are long gone, the LUVing
spirit remains at the heart of Southwest. The company’s
stock symbol on the NYSE is LUV, and red hearts can be
found across the company. These symbols embody the
Southwest spirit of employees “caring about themselves,
each other, and Southwest’s customers.” “Our fares can
be matched; our airplanes and routes can be copied. But
we pride ourselves on our customer service,” said Sherry
Phelps, director of corporate employment. That’s why
Southwest looks for and hires people who generate enthusiasm. In fact, having a sense of humor is a selection
criterion it uses for hiring. As one employee explained,
“We can train you to do any job, but we can’t give you the
right spirit.” And the feeling is reciprocated. When
Southwest needed to close reservation centers in three
cities in 2004, it didn’t fire a single employee but rather
paid for relocation and commuting expenses.
Questions
1. Southwest has mastered the low-price model and
has the financial results to prove it. Why don’t the
other airlines copy Southwest’s model?
2. What risks does Southwest face? Can it continue to
thrive as a low-cost airline when tough economic
times hit?
Sources: Barney Gimbel, “Southwest’s New Flight Plan,” Fortune, May 16, 2005, pp. 93–98;
Melanie Trottman, “Destination: Philadelphia,” Wall Street Journal, May 4, 2004; Andy Serwer,
“Southwest Airlines: The Hottest Thing in the Sky,” Fortune, March 8, 2004; Colleen Barrett,
“Fasten Your Seat Belts,” Adweek, January 26, 2004, p. 17; Jeff Bailey, “Southwest Airlines
Gains Advantage by Hedging on Long-Term Oil Contracts.” New York Times, November 28,
2007; Michelle Maynard, “To Save Fuel, Airlines Find No Speck Too Small,” New York Times,
June 11, 2008; Daniel B. Honigan, “Fred Taylor Leads Southwest Airlines’ Customers to New
Heights of Customer Satisfaction,” Marketing News, May 1, 2008, pp. 24–26; Matthew
Malone, “In for a Landing,” Condé Nast Portfolio, August 2008, pp. 91–93;
www.southwest.com.

PART 6 Delivering Value
Chapter 15 | Designing and Managing Integrated Marketing Channels
Chapter 16 | Managing Retailing, Wholesaling, and Logistics

r
e
t
ap
h
C

15

In This Chapter, We Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What is a marketing channel system and value network?
2. What work do marketing channels perform?
3. How should channels be designed?
4. What decisions do companies face in managing their channels?
5. How should companies integrate channels and manage channel
conflict?
6. What are the key issues with e-commerce and m-commerce?

With a novel pricing and distribution
scheme for DVD rentals, Netflix founder
Reid Hastings has found heaps of
success.

Designing and Managing
Integrated Marketing
Channels
Successful value creation needs successful value delivery. Holistic marketers
are increasingly taking a value network view of their businesses. Instead of limiting their focus to
their immediate suppliers, distributors, and customers, they are examining the whole supply
chain that links raw materials, components, and manufactured goods and shows how they move
toward the final consumers. Companies are looking at their suppliers’ suppliers upstream and at
their distributors’ customers downstream. They are looking at customer segments and considering
a wide range of new and different means to sell, distribute, and service their offerings.

Convinced that DVDs were the home video medium of the future, Netflix founder Reed
Hastings came up with a form of DVD rental distribution in 1997 different from the brickand-mortar stores used by market leader Blockbuster. Netflix’s strong customer loyalty and
positive word of mouth is a result of the service’s distinctive capabilities: modest subscription fees (as low as $9 a month), no late fees, (mostly) overnight mail delivery, a deep
catalog of over 100,000 movie titles, and a growing library of over 12,000 movies and television
episodes. The service also has proprietary software that allows customers to easily search for obscure
films and discover new ones. To improve the quality of its searches, Netflix sponsored a million-dollar
contest that drew thousands of entrants. The winning team consisted of seven members with diverse
backgrounds and skills whose solution was estimated to make Netflix’s
recommendations twice as effective. With new competition from Redbox’s
Companies today must build and manage a continuously
thousands of DVD-rental kiosks in McDonald’s and other locations, Netflix evolving and increasingly complex channel system and value
is putting more emphasis on streaming videos and instantaneous delivery network. In this chapter, we consider strategic and tactical
mechanisms. But it still sees growth in DVD rentals from its over 11 million issues with integrating marketing channels and developing
subscriber base. Netflix’s success has also captured Hollywood’s atten- value networks. We will examine marketing channel issues from
tion. Its online communities of customers who provide and read reviews the perspective of retailers, wholesalers, and physical
and feedback can be an important source of fans for films.1
distribution agencies in Chapter 16.

Marketing Channels
and Value Networks
Most producers do not sell their goods directly to the final users; between them stands a set of intermediaries performing a variety of functions. These intermediaries constitute a marketing channel (also called a trade channel or distribution channel). Formally, marketing channels are sets of
interdependent organizations participating in the process of making a product or service available
for use or consumption. They are the set of pathways a product or service follows after production,
culminating in purchase and consumption by the final end user.2
415

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Some intermediaries—such as wholesalers and retailers—buy, take title to, and resell the merchandise; they are called merchants. Others—brokers, manufacturers’ representatives, sales
agents—search for customers and may negotiate on the producer’s behalf but do not take title to
the goods; they are called agents. Still others—transportation companies, independent warehouses,
banks, advertising agencies—assist in the distribution process but neither take title to goods nor
negotiate purchases or sales; they are called facilitators.
Channels of all types play an important role in the success of a company and affect all other marketing decisions. Marketers should judge them in the context of the entire process by which their products
are made, distributed, sold, and serviced. We consider all these issues in the following sections.

The Importance of Channels
A marketing channel system is the particular set of marketing channels a firm employs, and decisions about it are among the most critical ones management faces. In the United States, channel
members collectively have earned margins that account for 30 percent to 50 percent of the ultimate
selling price. In contrast, advertising typically has accounted for less than 5 percent to 7 percent of
the final price.3 Marketing channels also represent a substantial opportunity cost. One of their chief
roles is to convert potential buyers into profitable customers. Marketing channels must not just
serve markets, they must also make markets.4
The channels chosen affect all other marketing decisions. The company’s pricing depends on
whether it uses online discounters or high-quality boutiques. Its sales force and advertising decisions depend on how much training and motivation dealers need. In addition, channel decisions
include relatively long-term commitments with other firms as well as a set of policies and procedures. When an automaker signs up independent dealers to sell its automobiles, it cannot buy them
out the next day and replace them with company-owned outlets. But at the same time, channel
choices themselves depend on the company’s marketing strategy with respect to segmentation,
targeting, and positioning. Holistic marketers ensure that marketing decisions in all these different
areas are made to collectively maximize value.
In managing its intermediaries, the firm must decide how much effort to devote to push versus
pull marketing. A push strategy uses the manufacturer’s sales force, trade promotion money, or
other means to induce intermediaries to carry, promote, and sell the product to end users. A push
strategy is particularly appropriate when there is low brand loyalty in a category, brand choice is
made in the store, the product is an impulse item, and product benefits are well understood. In a
pull strategy the manufacturer uses advertising, promotion, and other forms of communication to
persuade consumers to demand the product from intermediaries, thus inducing the intermediaries
to order it. Pull strategy is particularly appropriate when there is high brand loyalty and high
involvement in the category, when consumers are able to perceive differences between brands, and
when they choose the brand before they go to the store.
Top marketing companies such as Coca-Cola, Intel, and Nike skillfully employ both push and pull
strategies. A push strategy is more effective when accompanied by a well-designed and well-executed
pull strategy that activates consumer demand. On the other hand, without at least some consumer interest, it can be very difficult to gain much channel acceptance and support, and vice versa for that matter.

Hybrid Channels and Multichannel Marketing
Today’s successful companies typically employ hybrid channels and multichannel marketing, multiplying the number of “go-to-market” channels in any one market area. Hybrid channels or multichannel
marketing occurs when a single firm uses two or more marketing channels to reach customer
segments. HP has used its sales force to sell to large accounts, outbound telemarketing to sell to
medium-sized accounts, direct mail with an inbound number to sell to small accounts, retailers to sell
to still smaller accounts, and the Internet to sell specialty items. Philips also is a multichannel marketer.

Philips

416

Philips

Royal Philips Electronics of the Netherlands is one of the world’s biggest
electronics companies and Europe’s largest, with sales of over $66 billion in 2009. Philips’s
electronics products are channeled toward the consumer primarily through local and international
retailers. The company offers a broad range of products from high to low price/value quartiles,
relying on a diverse distribution model that includes mass merchants, retail chains, independents,

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

| CHAPTER 15

417

and small specialty stores. To work most effectively with these retail channels, Philips has created an organization designed around its retail customers, with dedicated global key account managers serving leading retailers
such as Best Buy, Carrefour, Costco, Dixons, and Tesco. Like many modern firms, Philips also sells via the Web
through its own online store as well as through a number of other online retailers.5
In multichannel marketing, each channel targets a different segment of buyers, or different need
states for one buyer, and delivers the right products in the right places in the right way at the least
cost. When this doesn’t happen, there can be channel conflict, excessive cost, or insufficient
demand. Launched in 1976, Dial-a-Mattress successfully grew for three decades by selling mattresses directly over the phone and, later, the Internet. A major expansion into 50 brick-and-mortar
stores in major metro areas was a failure, however. Secondary locations, chosen because management considered prime locations too expensive, could not generate enough customer traffic. The
company eventually declared bankruptcy.6
On the other hand, when a major catalog and Internet retailer invested significantly in brickand-mortar stores, different results emerged. Customers near the store purchased through the
catalog less frequently, but their Internet purchases were unchanged. As it turned out, customers
who liked to spend time browsing were happy to either use a catalog or visit the store; those channels
were interchangeable. Customers who used the Internet, on the other hand, were more transaction
focused and interested in efficiency, so they were less affected by the introduction of stores. Returns
and exchanges at the stores were found to increase because of ease and accessibility, but extra
purchases made by customers returning or exchanging at the store offset any revenue deficit.
Companies that manage hybrid channels clearly must make sure their channels work well
together and match each target customer’s preferred ways of doing business. Customers expect
channel integration, which allows them to:
•
•
•

Order a product online and pick it up at a convenient retail location
Return an online-ordered product to a nearby store of the retailer
Receive discounts and promotional offers based on total online and offline purchases

Here’s a company that has carefully managed its multiple channels. We discuss the topic of optimal
channel integration in greater detail later.

REI Outdoor supplier REI has been lauded by industry analysts for the seamless integration of its retail store, Web site, Internet kiosks, mail-order catalogs, value-priced outlets, and
toll-free order number. If an item is out of stock in the store, all customers need to do is tap into
the store’s Internet kiosk to order it from REI’s Web site. Less Internet-savvy customers can get
clerks to place the order for them at the checkout counters.
And REI not only generates store-to-Internet traffic, it also sends Internet
shoppers into its stores. If a customer browses REI’s site and stops to read
an REI “Learn and Share” article on backpacking, the site might highlight
an in-store promotion on hiking boots. Like many retailers, REI has found
that dual-channel shoppers spend significantly more than single-channel
shoppers, and tri-channel shoppers spend even more.7

Value Networks
A supply chain view of a firm sees markets as destination points and
amounts to a linear view of the flow of ingredients and components
through the production process to their ultimate sale to customers.
The company should first think of the target market, however, and
then design the supply chain backward from that point. This strategy
has been called demand chain planning.8
A broader view sees a company at the center of a value
network—a system of partnerships and alliances that a firm creates to source, augment, and deliver
its offerings. A value network includes a firm’s suppliers and its suppliers’ suppliers, and its immediate

REI’s in-store Internet kiosk gives
customers a convenient way to order out-of-stock items.

418

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

customers and their end customers. The value network includes valued relationships with others
such as university researchers and government approval agencies.
A company needs to orchestrate these parties in order to deliver superior value to the target
market. Oracle relies on 5.2 million developers and 400,000 discussion forum threads to advance its
products.9 Apple’s Developer Connection—where folks create iPhone apps and the like—has
50,000 members at different levels of membership.10 Developers keep 70 percent of any revenue
their products generate, and Apple gets 30 percent.
Demand chain planning yields several insights.11 First, the company can estimate whether more
money is made upstream or downstream, in case it can integrate backward or forward. Second, the
company is more aware of disturbances anywhere in the supply chain that might change costs,
prices, or supplies. Third, companies can go online with their business partners to speed communications, transactions, and payments; reduce costs; and increase accuracy. Ford not only manages numerous supply chains but also sponsors or operates on many B2B Web sites and exchanges.
Managing a value network means making increasing investments in information technology (IT)
and software. Firms have introduced supply chain management (SCM) software and invited such
software firms as SAP and Oracle to design comprehensive enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems to manage cash flow, manufacturing, human resources, purchasing, and other major
functions within a unified framework. They hope to break up departmental silos—where each
department only acts in its own self interest—and carry out core business processes more seamlessly.
Most, however, are still a long way from truly comprehensive ERP systems.
Marketers, for their part, have traditionally focused on the side of the value network that looks
toward the customer, adopting customer relationship management (CRM) software and practices.
In the future, they will increasingly participate in and influence their companies’ upstream activities and become network managers, not just product and customer managers.

The Role of Marketing Channels
Why would a producer delegate some of the selling job to intermediaries, relinquishing control
over how and to whom products are sold? Through their contacts, experience, specialization, and
scale of operation, intermediaries make goods widely available and accessible to target markets,
usually offering the firm more effectiveness and efficiency than it can achieve on its own.12
Many producers lack the financial resources and expertise to sell directly on their own. The
William Wrigley Jr. Company would not find it practical to establish small retail gum shops
throughout the world or to sell gum by mail order. It is easier to work through the extensive network of privately owned distribution organizations. Even Ford would be hard-pressed to replace all
the tasks done by its almost 12,000 dealer outlets worldwide.

Channel Functions and Flows
A marketing channel performs the work of moving goods from producers to consumers. It
overcomes the time, place, and possession gaps that separate goods and services from those who
need or want them. Members of the marketing channel perform a number of key functions (see
Table 15.1).
Some of these functions (storage and movement, title, and communications) constitute a
forward flow of activity from the company to the customer; other functions (ordering and
payment) constitute a backward flow from customers to the company. Still others (information, negotiation, finance, and risk taking) occur in both directions. Five flows are illustrated
in
Figure 15.1 for the marketing of forklift trucks. If these flows were superimposed in
one diagram, we would see the tremendous complexity of even simple marketing channels.
A manufacturer selling a physical product and services might require three channels: a sales
channel, a delivery channel, and a service channel. To sell its Bowflex fitness equipment, the Nautilus
Group historically has emphasized direct marketing via television infomercials and ads,
inbound/outbound call centers, response mailings, and the Internet as sales channels; UPS ground
service as the delivery channel; and local repair people as the service channel. Reflecting shifting
consumer buying habits, Nautilus now also sells Bowflex through commercial, retail, and specialty
retail channels.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

TABLE 15.1

| CHAPTER 15

Channel Member Functions

• Gather information about potential and current customers, competitors, and other actors and
forces in the marketing environment.
• Develop and disseminate persuasive communications to stimulate purchasing.
• Negotiate and reach agreements on price and other terms so that transfer of ownership or
possession can be affected.
• Place orders with manufacturers.
• Acquire the funds to finance inventories at different levels in the marketing channel.
• Assume risks connected with carrying out channel work.
• Provide for the successive storage and movement of physical products.
• Provide for buyers’ payment of their bills through banks and other financial institutions.
• Oversee actual transfer of ownership from one organization or person to another.

The question for marketers is not whether various channel functions need to be performed—
they must be—but rather, who is to perform them. All channel functions have three things
in common: They use up scarce resources; they can often be performed better through
specialization; and they can be shifted among channel members. Shifting some functions to intermediaries lowers the producer’s costs and prices, but the intermediary must add a charge to
cover its work. If the intermediaries are more efficient than the manufacturer, prices to consumers should be lower. If consumers perform some functions themselves, they should enjoy
even lower prices. Changes in channel institutions thus largely reflect the discovery of more efficient ways to combine or separate the economic functions that provide assortments of goods
to target customers.

1. Physical Flow
Suppliers

Transporters,
warehouses

Manufacturer

Transporters,
warehouses

Dealers

Transporters

Customers

2. Title Flow
Suppliers

Manufacturer

Dealers

Customers

3. Payment Flow
Suppliers

Banks

Manufacturer

Banks

Dealers

Banks

Customers

Transporters,
warehouses,
banks

Manufacturer

Transporters,
warehouses,
banks

Dealers

Transporters,
banks

Customers

Advertising
agency

Manufacturer

Advertising
agency

4. Information Flow
Suppliers

5. Promotion Flow
Suppliers

Dealers

|Fig. 15.1|

Five Marketing Flows in the Marketing Channel for Forklift Trucks

Customers

419

420

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Bowflex fitness equipment is sold
through a variety of channels.

Channel Levels
The producer and the final customer are part of every channel. We will use the number of intermediary levels to designate the length of a channel.
Figure 15.2(a) illustrates several consumergoods marketing channels of different lengths.
A zero-level channel, also called a direct marketing channel, consists of a manufacturer selling directly to the final customer. The major examples are door-to-door sales, home parties, mail
order, telemarketing, TV selling, Internet selling, and manufacturer-owned stores. Traditionally,
Avon sales representatives sell cosmetics door-to-door; Franklin Mint sells collectibles through
mail order; Verizon uses the telephone to prospect for new customers or to sell enhanced services
to existing customers; Time-Life sells music and video collections through TV commercials or

(a) Consumer Marketing Channels

(b) Industrial Marketing Channels

0-level

1-level

2-level

3-level

0-level

1-level

2-level

3-level

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Manufacturer

Wholesaler

Wholesaler

Manufacturer's
representative

Manufacturer's
sales branch

Industrial
customer

Industrial
customer

Jobber

Consumer

Retailer

Retailer

Retailer

Consumer

Consumer

Consumer

|Fig. 15.2|

Consumer and Industrial Marketing Channels

Industrial
distributors

Industrial
customer

Industrial
customer

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

Sony

longer “infomercials”; Red Envelope sells gifts online; and Apple
sells computers and other consumer electronics through its own
stores. Many of these firms now sell directly to customers in more
ways than one, via online, catalogs, etc.
A one-level channel contains one selling intermediary, such as a
retailer. A two-level channel contains two intermediaries. In consumer markets, these are typically a wholesaler and a retailer. A
three-level channel contains three intermediaries. In the meatpacking
industry, wholesalers sell to jobbers, essentially small-scale wholesalers, who sell to small retailers. In Japan, food distribution may include as many as six levels. Obtaining information about end users
and exercising control becomes more difficult for the producer as
the number of channel levels increases.
Figure 15.2(b) shows channels commonly used in B2B marketing. An industrial-goods manufacturer can use its sales force
to sell directly to industrial customers; or it can sell to industrial
distributors who sell to industrial customers; or it can sell
through manufacturer’s representatives or its own sales branches
directly to industrial customers, or indirectly to industrial customers through industrial distributors. Zero-, one-, and two-level
marketing channels are quite common.
Channels normally describe a forward movement of products
from source to user, but reverse-flow channels are also important
(1) to reuse products or containers (such as refillable chemical-carrying
drums), (2) to refurbish products for resale (such as circuit boards or
computers), (3) to recycle products (such as paper), and (4) to dispose of products and packaging.
Reverse-flow intermediaries include manufacturers’ redemption centers, community groups, trashcollection specialists, recycling centers, trash-recycling brokers, and central processing warehousing.13
Many creative solutions have emerged in this area in recent years, such as Greenopolis.

Greenopolis Launched by Waste Management Corporation after it acquired the

Code Blue Recycling company, Greenopolis is a new company with an entirely different recycling system that allows consumers and a consortium of consumer
packaged goods (CPG) companies to “close the loop” in the recovery and reuse of
postconsumer material. With its mantra, “Rethink. Recycle. Reward,” Greenopolis
consists of (1) an extensive set of interactive, on-street recycling kiosks in various retail settings, (2) a number of material reprocessing facilities, (3) a menu of consumer recycling rewards, and (4) a significant online community and social media network. Participating CPG
companies use the Greenopolis symbol on their product packaging. The kiosk system is designed to collect those products, track and reward consumers who bring them, and put packaging into reuse or reprocessing. An important feature is that Greenopolis is fully accountable.
Innovative kiosk technology allows consumers to follow their recycling contribution, as well as
the rewards they earn from the partnering companies. CPG companies, in turn, are able to
measure their share of recovery. By achieving sufficient scale and accessibility in the marketplace and making recycling fun, easy, and personally rewarding to consumers, Greenopolis
aims to improve recycling rates and make an important environmental difference.14

Service Sector Channels
As Internet and other technologies advance, service industries such as banking, insurance, travel, and stock buying and selling are operating through new channels.
Kodak offers its customers four ways to print their digital photos—minilabs in retail
outlets, home printers, online services at its Ofoto Web site, and self-service kiosks.
The world leader with 80,000 kiosks, Kodak makes money both by selling the units
and by supplying the chemical and paper they use to make the prints.15

| CHAPTER 15

421

RedEnvelope has built an online
gift powerhouse.

Greenopolis is a novel recycling
system that offers financial and
environmental benefits to consumers and companies.

422

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Marketing channels also keep changing in “person marketing.” Besides live and programmed entertainment, entertainers, musicians, and other artists can reach prospective and existing fans online in
many ways—their own Web sites, social community sites such as Facebook and Twitter, and third-party
Web sites. Politicians also must choose a mix of channels—mass media, rallies, coffee hours, spot TV
ads, direct mail, billboards, faxes, e-mail, blogs, podcasts, Web sites, and social networking sites—for delivering their messages to voters.
Nonprofit service organizations such as schools develop “educational-dissemination systems”
and hospitals develop “health-delivery systems.” These institutions must figure out agencies and locations for reaching a far-flung population.

Cleveland Clinic

One of the largest and most respected hospitals in the
country, Cleveland Clinic, provides medical care in a variety of ways and settings. The main
campus in Cleveland, whose 50 buildings occupy 166 acres, is the hub for patient care, research, and education. Cleveland Clinic also operates 15 family primary-care centers in the
suburbs. Eight hospitals extend the clinic’s reach in Northeast Ohio. Community outreach programs in all these areas provide education and free health screenings. Cleveland Clinic also offers major
medical care in Florida, Toronto, and, as of 2012, Abu Dhabi. It has a suite of secure online health services
for both patients and physicians and is developing partnerships with
Google and Microsoft to further its Internet capabilities.16

Channel-Design
Decisions
To design a marketing channel system, marketers analyze customer
needs and wants, establish channel objectives and constraints, and
identify and evaluate major channel alternatives.

Analyzing Customer Needs and Wants
Cleveland Clinic provides health
care services in a variety of different locations and settings.

Consumers may choose the channels they prefer based on price,
product assortment, and convenience, as well as their own shopping goals (economic, social, or experiential).17 As with products,
segmentation exists, and marketers must be aware that different consumers have different needs
during the purchase process.
One study of 40 grocery and clothing retailers in France, Germany, and the United Kingdom
found that they served three types of shoppers: (1) service/quality customers who cared most about
the variety and performance of products and service, (2) price/value customers who were most concerned about spending wisely, and (3) affinity customers who primarily sought stores that suited
people like themselves or groups they aspired to join. As
Figure 15.3 shows, customer profiles
differed across the three markets: In France, shoppers stressed service and quality, in the United
Kingdom, affinity, and in Germany, price and value.18
Even the same consumer, though, may choose different channels for different functions in a
purchase, browsing a catalog before visiting a store or test driving a car at a dealer before ordering
online. Some consumers are willing to “trade up” to retailers offering higher-end goods such as
TAG Heuer watches or Callaway golf clubs and “trade down” to discount retailers for private-label
paper towels, detergent, or vitamins.19
Channels produce five service outputs:
1.

2.
3.

Lot size—The number of units the channel permits a typical customer to purchase on one
occasion. In buying cars for its fleet, Hertz prefers a channel from which it can buy a large lot
size; a household wants a channel that permits a lot size of one.
Waiting and delivery time—The average time customers wait for receipt of goods. Customers
increasingly prefer faster delivery channels.
Spatial convenience—The degree to which the marketing channel makes it easy for customers
to purchase the product. Toyota offers greater spatial convenience than Lexus because there are

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

Service/quality
customers
France

Price/value
customers
50

Germany

16

United Kingdom

15

Affinity
customers
18

32
39

45

19

66
Percent of respondents

Grocery
Service/quality
customers
40

Germany

13

United Kingdom

13

Price/value
customers

Affinity
customers
25

27
42

45

32

55
Percent of respondents

4.

5.

423

|Fig. 15.3|

Clothing

France

| CHAPTER 15

more Toyota dealers, helping customers save on transportation and search costs in buying and
repairing an automobile.
Product variety—The assortment provided by the marketing channel. Normally, customers
prefer a greater assortment because more choices increase the chance of finding what they
need, although too many choices can sometimes create a negative effect.20
Service backup—Add-on services (credit, delivery, installation, repairs) provided by the
channel. The greater the service backup, the greater the work provided by the channel.21

Providing greater service outputs also means increasing channel costs and raising prices. The
success of discount stores such as Walmart and Target and extreme examples like Dollar General
and Family Dollar indicates that many consumers are willing to accept smaller service outputs if
they can save money.

Establishing Objectives and Constraints
Marketers should state their channel objectives in terms of service output levels and associated
cost and support levels. Under competitive conditions, channel members should arrange their
functional tasks to minimize costs and still provide desired levels of service. 22 Usually,
planners can identify several market segments based on desired service and choose the best
channels for each.
Channel objectives vary with product characteristics. Bulky products, such as building materials, require channels that minimize the shipping distance and the amount of handling.
Nonstandard products such as custom-built machinery are sold directly by sales representatives.
Products requiring installation or maintenance services, such as heating and cooling systems, are
usually sold and maintained by the company or by franchised dealers. High-unit-value products
such as generators and turbines are often sold through a company sales force rather than intermediaries.
Marketers must adapt their channel objectives to the larger environment. When economic conditions are depressed, producers want to move goods to market using shorter channels and without
services that add to the final price. Legal regulations and restrictions also affect channel design. U.S.
law looks unfavorably on channel arrangements that substantially lessen competition or create
a monopoly.

What Do European
Consumers Value
Source: Peter N. Child, Suzanne Heywood, and
Michael Kliger, “Do Retail Brands Travel?” The
McKinsley Quarterly, 2002, Number 1, pp. 11–13.
All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of
McKinsey & Company.

424

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

In entering new markets, firms often closely observe what other firms are doing. France’s
Auchan considered the presence of its French rivals Leclerc and Casino in Poland as key to its decision to also enter that market.23 Apple’s channel objectives of creating a dynamic retail experience
for consumers was not being met by existing channels, so it chose to open it own stores.24

Apple Stores

Apple stores offer a unique brand
experience to Apple enthusiasts
and prospects.

When Apple stores were launched in 2001, many questioned
their prospects and BusinessWeek published an article titled, “Sorry Steve, Here’s Why Apple
Stores Won’t Work.” Fast-forward five years, and Apple was celebrating the launch of its
spectacular new Manhattan showcase store. With almost 275 locations by the end of 2009,
net revenue from stores totaled $6.6 billion and represented roughly
20 percent of total corporate revenue. Annual sales per square foot of an
Apple store have been estimated at $4,700—the Fifth Avenue
location is reported to do a staggering $35,000 of business per square
foot–compared to Tiffany’s $2,666, Best Buy’s $930, and Saks’s $362.
Any way you look at it, Apple stores have been an unqualified success.
Designed to fuel excitement for the brand, they let people see and touch
Apple products—and experience what Apple can do for them—making it
more likely they’ll become Apple customers. They target tech-savvy customers with in-store product presentations and workshops; a full line of
Apple products, software, and accessories; and a “Genius Bar” staffed by
Apple specialists who provide technical support, often free of charge.
Although the stores upset existing retailers, Apple has worked hard to
smooth relationships, in part justifying the decision as a natural evolution
of its existing online sales channel.

Identifying Major Channel Alternatives
Each channel—from sales forces to agents, distributors, dealers, direct mail, telemarketing, and the
Internet—has unique strengths and weaknesses. Sales forces can handle complex products and transactions, but they are expensive. The Internet is inexpensive but may not be as effective with complex products. Distributors can create sales, but the company loses direct contact with customers. Several clients
can share the cost of manufacturers’ reps, but the selling effort is less intense than company reps provide.
Channel alternatives differ in three ways: the types of intermediaries, the number needed, and
the terms and responsibilities of each. Let’s look at these factors.

TYPES OF INTERMEDIARIES Consider the channel alternatives identified by a consumer
electronics company that produces satellite radios. It could sell its players directly to automobile
manufacturers to be installed as original equipment, auto dealers, rental car companies, or satellite
radio specialist dealers through a direct sales force or through distributors. It could also sell its players
through company stores, online retailers, mail-order catalogs, or mass merchandisers such as Best Buy.
As Netflix did, companies should search for innovative marketing channels. Columbia House
has successfully merchandised music albums through the mail and Internet. Harry and David and
Calyx & Corolla have creatively sold fruit and flowers, respectively, through direct delivery.
Sometimes a company chooses a new or unconventional channel because of the difficulty, cost,
or ineffectiveness of working with the dominant channel. One advantage is often reduced competition, at least at first. Years ago, after trying to sell its inexpensive Timex watches through jewelry
stores, the U.S. Time Company placed them instead in fast-growing mass-merchandise outlets.
Frustrated with a printed catalog it saw as out-of-date and unprofessional, commercial lighting
company Display Supply & Lighting developed an interactive online catalog that drove down costs,
speeded the sales process, and increased revenue.25
NUMBER OF INTERMEDIARIES Three strategies based on the number of intermediaries are
exclusive distribution, selective distribution, and intensive distribution.
Exclusive distribution means severely limiting the number of intermediaries. It’s appropriate
when the producer wants to maintain control over the service level and outputs offered by the

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

resellers, and it often includes exclusive dealing arrangements. By granting exclusive distribution,
the producer hopes to obtain more dedicated and knowledgeable selling. It requires a closer
partnership between seller and reseller and is used in the distribution of new automobiles, some
major appliances, and some women’s apparel brands.
Exclusive deals are becoming a mainstay for specialists looking for an edge in markets
increasingly driven by price.26 When the legendary Italian designer label Gucci found its image
severely tarnished by overexposure from licensing and discount stores, it decided to end contracts
with third-party suppliers, control its distribution, and open its own stores to bring back some of
the luster.27
Selective distribution relies on only some of
the intermediaries willing to carry a particular
product. Whether established or new, the company does not need to worry about having too
many outlets; it can gain adequate market coverage with more control and less cost than intensive
distribution. STIHL is a good example of selective
distribution.

STIHL

STIHL manufactures handheld outdoor power equipment. All its
products are branded under one name and
it does not make private labels for other
companies. Best known for chain saws, it
has expanded into string trimmers, blowers, hedge
trimmers, and cut-off machines. It sells exclusively to
six independent U.S. distributors and six STIHL-owned
marketing and distribution centers, which sell to a nationwide network of more than 8,000 servicing retail
dealers. The company is also a worldwide exporter of
U.S. manufactured STIHL products to 80 countries.
STIHL is one of the few outdoor-power-equipment
companies that do not sell through mass merchants,
catalogs, or the Internet.28
Intensive distribution places the goods or services in as many outlets as possible. This strategy
serves well for snack foods, soft drinks, newspapers,
candies, and gum—products consumers buy frequently or in a variety of locations. Convenience
stores such as 7-Eleven, Circle K, and gas-stationlinked stores such as ExxonMobil’s On the Run
have survived by selling items that provide just
that—location and time convenience.
Manufacturers are constantly tempted to move
from exclusive or selective distribution to more intensive distribution to increase coverage and sales.
This strategy may help in the short term, but if not
done properly, it can hurt long-term performance
by encouraging retailers to compete aggressively.
Price wars can then erode profitability, dampening
retailer interest and harming brand equity. Some
firms do not want to be sold everywhere. After
Sears acquired discount chain Kmart, Nike pulled
all its products from Sears to make sure Kmart
could not carry the brand.29

| CHAPTER 15

425

STIHL’s selective distribution
strategy includes 8,000 independent dealers but does not include
other, broader forms of
distribution.

426

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

TERMS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHANNEL MEMBERS Each channel member
must be treated respectfully and given the opportunity to be profitable. The main elements in the
“trade-relations mix” are price policies, conditions of sale, territorial rights, and specific services to
be performed by each party.
•

Price policy calls for the producer to establish a price list and schedule of discounts and
allowances that intermediaries see as equitable and sufficient.
Conditions of sale refers to payment terms and producer guarantees. Most producers grant
cash discounts to distributors for early payment. They might also offer a guarantee against
defective merchandise or price declines, creating an incentive to buy larger quantities.
Distributors’ territorial rights define the distributors’ territories and the terms under which
the producer will enfranchise other distributors. Distributors normally expect to receive full
credit for all sales in their territory, whether or not they did the selling.
Mutual services and responsibilities must be carefully spelled out, especially in franchised and
exclusive-agency channels. McDonald’s provides franchisees with a building, promotional support,
a record-keeping system, training, and general administrative and technical assistance. In turn,
franchisees are expected to satisfy company standards for the physical facilities, cooperate with new
promotional programs, furnish requested information, and buy supplies from specified vendors.

•

•

•

Evaluating Major Channel Alternatives
Each channel alternative needs to be evaluated against economic, control, and adaptive criteria.

ECONOMIC CRITERIA Each channel alternative will produce a different level of sales and
costs.
Figure 15.4 shows how six different sales channels stack up in terms of the value added
per sale and the cost per transaction. For example, in the sale of industrial products costing
between $2,000 and $5,000, the cost per transaction has been estimated at $500 (field sales),
$200 (distributors), $50 (telesales), and $10 (Internet). A Booz Allen Hamilton study showed that
the average transaction at a full-service branch costs the bank $4.07, a phone transaction costs
$.54, and an ATM transaction costs $.27, but a typical Web-based transaction costs only $.01.30
Firms will try to align customers and channels to maximize demand at the lowest overall cost.
Clearly, sellers try to replace high-cost channels with low-cost channels as long as the value added
per sale is sufficient. Consider the following situation:
A North Carolina furniture manufacturer wants to sell its line to retailers on the West
Coast. One alternative is to hire 10 new sales representatives to operate out of a sales office
in San Francisco and receive a base salary plus commissions. The other alternative is to
use a San Francisco manufacturer’s sales agency that has extensive contacts with retailers.
Its 30 sales representatives would receive a commission based on their sales.

High

|Fig. 15.4|

Source: Oxford Associates, adapted from Dr.
Rowland T. Moriarty. Cubex Corp.

Sales force
Value-added
partners

Value-add of Sale

The Value-Adds
versus Costs of
Different Channels

Distributors

Direct sales
channels

Retail stores
"Indirect" channels

Telemarketing
Internet
Direct marketing
channels
Low
Low

High
Cost per Transaction

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

Selling Costs (dollars)

Manufacturer's
sales agency

Company
sales force

SB
Level of Sales (dollars)

The first step is to estimate how many sales each alternative will likely generate. A company
sales force will concentrate on the company’s products, be better trained to sell them, be more
aggressive because each rep’s future depends on the company’s success, and be more successful
because many customers prefer to deal directly with the company. The sales agency however has
30 representatives, not just 10; it may be just as aggressive, depending on the commission level;
customers may appreciate its independence; and it may have extensive contacts and market
knowledge. The marketer needs to evaluate all these factors in formulating a demand function
for the two different channels.
The next step is to estimate the costs of selling different volumes through each channel. The cost
schedules are shown in
Figure 15.5. Engaging a sales agency is less expensive than establishing a new
company sales office, but costs rise faster through an agency because sales agents get larger commissions.
The final step is comparing sales and costs. As Figure 15.5 shows, there is one sales level (SB) at
which selling costs are the same for the two channels. The sales agency is thus the better channel for
any sales volume below SB, and the company sales branch is better at any volume above SB. Given
this information, it is not surprising that sales agents tend to be used by smaller firms, or by large
firms in smaller territories where the volume is low.

CONTROL AND ADAPTIVE CRITERIA Using a sales agency can pose a control problem.
Agents may concentrate on the customers who buy the most, not necessarily those who buy the
manufacturer’s goods. They might not master the technical details of the company’s product or
handle its promotion materials effectively.
To develop a channel, members must commit to each other for a specified period of time. Yet
these commitments invariably reduce the producer’s ability to respond to change and uncertainty.
The producer needs channel structures and policies that provide high adaptability.

Channel-Management Decisions
After a company has chosen a channel system, it must select, train, motivate, and evaluate individual
intermediaries for each channel. It must also modify channel design and arrangements over time.
As the company grows, it can also consider channel expansion into international markets.

Selecting Channel Members
To customers, the channels are the company. Consider the negative impression customers would
get of McDonald’s, Shell Oil, or Mercedes-Benz if one or more of their outlets or dealers consistently appeared dirty, inefficient, or unpleasant.
To facilitate channel member selection, producers should determine what characteristics
distinguish the better intermediaries—number of years in business, other lines carried, growth
and profit record, financial strength, cooperativeness, and service reputation. If the intermediaries are sales agents, producers should evaluate the number and character of other lines
carried and the size and quality of the sales force. If the intermediaries are department stores
that want exclusive distribution, their locations, future growth potential, and type of clientele
will matter.

| CHAPTER 15

427

|Fig. 15.5|

Break-Even Cost
Chart for the Choice
between a Company
Sales Force and
a Manufacturer’s
Sales Agency

428

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Training and Motivating Channel Members
A company needs to view its intermediaries the same way it views its end users. It should determine
their needs and wants and tailor its channel offering to provide them with superior value.
Carefully implemented training, market research, and other capability-building programs can
motivate and improve intermediaries’ performance. The company must constantly communicate
that intermediaries are crucial partners in a joint effort to satisfy end users of the product. Microsoft
requires its third-party service engineers to complete a set of courses and take certification exams.
Those who pass are formally recognized as Microsoft Certified Professionals and can use this designation to promote their own business. Other firms use customer surveys rather than exams.

CHANNEL POWER Producers vary greatly in their skill in managing distributors.
Channel power is the ability to alter channel members’ behavior so they take actions they
would not have taken otherwise.31 Manufacturers can draw on the following types of power to
elicit cooperation:
•

•

•
•

•

Coercive power. A manufacturer threatens to withdraw a resource or terminate a relationship
if intermediaries fail to cooperate. This power can be effective, but its exercise produces resentment and can lead the intermediaries to organize countervailing power.
Reward power. The manufacturer offers intermediaries an extra benefit for performing specific
acts or functions. Reward power typically produces better results than coercive power, but intermediaries may come to expect a reward every time the manufacturer wants a certain behavior to occur.
Legitimate power. The manufacturer requests a behavior that is warranted under the contract. As
long as the intermediaries view the manufacturer as a legitimate leader, legitimate power works.
Expert power. The manufacturer has special knowledge the intermediaries value. Once the
intermediaries acquire this expertise, however, expert power weakens. The manufacturer
must continue to develop new expertise so intermediaries will want to continue cooperating.
Referent power. The manufacturer is so highly respected that intermediaries are proud to be
associated with it. Companies such as IBM, Caterpillar, and Hewlett-Packard have high
referent power.32

Coercive and reward power are objectively observable; legitimate, expert, and referent power are
more subjective and depend on the ability and willingness of parties to recognize them.
Most producers see gaining intermediaries’ cooperation as a huge challenge. They often use positive motivators, such as higher margins, special deals, premiums, cooperative advertising allowances, display allowances, and sales contests. At times they will apply negative sanctions, such as
threatening to reduce margins, slow down delivery, or terminate the relationship. The weakness of
this approach is that the producer is using crude, stimulus-response thinking.
In many cases, retailers hold the power. Manufacturers offer the nation’s supermarkets between 150
and 250 new items each week, of which store buyers reject over 70 percent. Manufacturers need to know
the acceptance criteria buyers, buying committees, and store managers use. ACNielsen interviews found
that store managers were most influenced by (in order of importance) strong evidence of consumer acceptance, a well-designed advertising and sales promotion plan, and generous financial incentives.

CHANNEL PARTNERSHIPS More sophisticated companies try to forge a long-term
partnership with distributors.33 The manufacturer clearly communicates what it wants from its
distributors in the way of market coverage, inventory levels, marketing development, account
solicitation, technical advice and services, and marketing information and may introduce a
compensation plan for adhering to the policies.
To streamline the supply chain and cut costs, many manufacturers and retailers have adopted
efficient consumer response (ECR) practices to organize their relationships in three areas: (1)
demand side management or collaborative practices to stimulate consumer demand by promoting joint marketing and sales activities, (2) supply side management or collaborative practices to
optimize supply (with a focus on joint logistics and supply chain activities), and (3) enablers and
integrators, or collaborative information technology and process improvement tools to support
joint activities that reduce operational problems, allow greater standardization, and so on.
Research has shown that although ECR has a positive impact on manufacturers’ economic performance and capability development, manufacturers may also feel they are inequitably sharing the
burdens of adopting it and not getting as much as they deserve from retailers.34

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

Evaluating Channel Members
Producers must periodically evaluate intermediaries’ performance against such standards as salesquota attainment, average inventory levels, customer delivery time, treatment of damaged and
lost goods, and cooperation in promotional and training programs. A producer will occasionally
discover it is overpaying particular intermediaries for what they are actually doing. One manufacturer compensating a distributor for holding inventories found the inventories were actually held
in a public warehouse at its own expense. Producers should set up functional discounts in which
they pay specified amounts for the trade channel’s performance of each agreed upon service.
Underperformers need to be counseled, retrained, motivated, or terminated.

Modifying Channel Design and Arrangements
No channel strategy remains effective over the whole product life cycle. In competitive markets
with low entry barriers, the optimal channel structure will inevitably change over time. The change
could mean adding or dropping individual market channels or channel members or developing a
totally new way to sell goods.

CHANNEL EVOLUTION A new firm typically starts as a local operation selling in a fairly
circumscribed market, using a few existing intermediaries. Identifying the best channels might not
be a problem; the problem is often to convince the available intermediaries to handle the firm’s line.
If the firm is successful, it might branch into new markets with different channels. In smaller
markets, the firm might sell directly to retailers; in larger markets, through distributors. In rural
areas, it might work with general-goods merchants; in urban areas, with limited-line merchants. It
might grant exclusive franchises or sell through all willing outlets. In one country, it might use
international sales agents; in another, it might partner with a local firm.
Early buyers might be willing to pay for high-value-added channels, but later buyers will switch
to lower-cost channels. Small office copiers were first sold by manufacturers’ direct sales forces, later
through office equipment dealers, still later through mass merchandisers, and now by mail-order
firms and Internet marketers.
In short, the channel system evolves as a function of local opportunities and conditions, emerging
threats and opportunities, company resources and capabilities, and other factors. Consider some of
the challenges Dell has encountered in recent years.35

Dell Dell revolutionized the personal computer category by selling directly to customers
Dell

via the telephone and later the Internet. Customers could custom-design the exact PC they
wanted, and rigorous cost cutting allowed for low everyday prices. Sound like a winning formula?
It was for almost two decades. But by 2006, the company was encountering problems that led to
a steep stock price decline. First, reinvigorated competitors such as HP narrowed the gap in productivity and price. Always focused more on the business market, Dell struggled to sell effectively to the consumer market. A shift in consumer preferences to buying in retail stores didn’t help, but self-inflicted damage
from an ultra-efficient supply chain model that squeezed costs—and quality—out of customer service was
perhaps the most painful. Managers evaluated call center employees primarily on how quickly they finished
each call—a recipe for disaster as scores of customers felt their problems were ignored or not properly handled. A drop in R&D spending that hindered new-product development and led to a lack of differentiation
didn’t help either. Clearly, Dell had entered a new chapter in its history. A fundamental rethinking of its channel strategy and its marketing approach as a whole would consume the company for the next five years.

Channel Modification Decisions
A producer must periodically review and modify its channel design and arrangements.36 The
distribution channel may not work as planned, consumer buying patterns change, the market
expands, new competition arises, innovative distribution channels emerge, and the product moves
into later stages in the product life cycle.37
Adding or dropping individual channel members requires an incremental analysis. Increasingly detailed customer databases and sophisticated analysis tools can provide guidance into those decisions.38 A
basic question is: What would the firm’s sales and profits look like with and without this intermediary?

| CHAPTER 15

429

430

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Perhaps the most difficult decision is whether to revise the overall channel strategy.39 Avon’s
door-to-door system for selling cosmetics was modified as more women entered the workforce.
Despite the convenience of automated teller machines, online banking, and telephone call centers,
many bank customers still want “high touch” over “high tech,” or at least they want the choice.
Banks are thus opening more branches and developing cross-selling and up-selling practices to
capitalize on the face-to-face contact that results.

Global Channel Considerations
International markets pose distinct challenges, including variations in customers’ shopping habits,
but opportunities at the same time.40 In India, sales from “organized retail”—hypermarkets, supermarkets, and department stores—make up only 4 percent of the $322 billion market. Most shopping still takes place in millions of independent grocery shops or kirana stores, run by an owner
and one or perhaps two other people.41 Many top global retailers such as Germany’s Aldi, the
United Kingdom’s Tesco, and Spain’s Zara have tailored their image to local needs and wants when
entering a new market.
Franchised companies such as Curves women’s fitness centers and Subway sandwich shops have
experienced double-digit growth overseas, especially in developing markets such as Brazil and
Central and Eastern Europe. In some cases, master franchisees pay a significant fee to acquire a territory or country where they operate as a “mini-franchiser” in their own right. More knowledgeable
about local laws, customs, and consumer needs than foreign companies, they sell and oversee franchises and collect royalties.42

Subway has franchise operators all
over the world, including in the
Doha City Center Shopping Mall
in Qatar, shown here.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

| CHAPTER 15

431

Sony

But many pitfalls exist in global expansion, and retailers must also be able to defend their
home turf from the entry of foreign retailers. Selling everything from food to televisions,
France’s Carrefour, the world’s second-biggest retailer, has encountered stiff competition in its
home markets from smaller supermarkets for groceries and from specialist retailers such as
IKEA or Fnac for other goods. Although strong in parts of Europe, Asia, and Latin America,
Carrefour (which means “crossroads” in French) has been forced to cease operations in a number of countries, such as Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Russia,
Switzerland, and Portugal. Another of France’s mega-retailers the Walmart-like Auchan, has
been quite successful in entering emerging markets like China while unable to crack markets in
the United States or Britain.43
The first step in global channel planning, as is often the case in marketing, is to get close to
customers. To adapt its clothing lines to better suit European tastes, Philadelphia-based Urban
Outfitters set up a separate design and merchandising unit in London before it opened its first store
in Europe. Although they increased costs, the blended American and European looks helped the
retailer stand out.44 Crossing the Atlantic the other way, Tesco introduced its Fresh & Easy gourmet
minisupermarkets into California after 20 years of research that included spending time with U.S.
families and videotaping the contents of their refrigerators. The retailer had gone through similar
steps before entering China.45
A good retail strategy that offers customers a positive shopping experience and unique
value, if properly adapted, is likely to find success in more than one market. Take Topshop
for instance.

Topshop Founded by Sir Richard Green in the United Kingdom in 1994, clothing

retailer Topshop is a chain of 310 UK stores and 116 international franchisees that commands intense loyalty from its trendy, style-obsessed customer base. Selling primarily
party clothes, accessories, and daywear to women, Topshop blends English
street fashion, reasonable prices, and fun services. A higher-end, quirkier
version of fast-fashion chains H&M and Zara, Topshop allows middle-market consumers to dress upscale affordably. Partnering with style icons Kate Moss, Stella Vine,
and Celia Birtwell to create the latest designs, Topshop offers style advisors, Topshopto-Go (a Tupperware-type party that brings a style advisor to a customer’s home with
outfits for up to 10 people), and Topshop Express (an express delivery service via Vespa
scooters for fashion “emergencies”). The 60,000 square foot store on Broadway in
New York City is Topshop’s second biggest and first flagship store outside the
United Kingdom.46

Channel Integration
and Systems
Distribution channels don’t stand still. We’ll look at the recent growth of vertical,
horizontal, and multichannel marketing systems; the next section examines how
these systems cooperate, conflict, and compete.

Vertical Marketing Systems
A conventional marketing channel consists of an independent producer, wholesaler(s), and retailer(s). Each is a separate business seeking to maximize its own profits, even if this goal reduces
profit for the system as a whole. No channel member has complete or substantial control over other
members.
A vertical marketing system (VMS), by contrast, includes the producer, wholesaler(s), and
retailer(s) acting as a unified system. One channel member, the channel captain, owns or franchises the
others or has so much power that they all cooperate. “Marketing Insight: Channel Stewards Take
Charge” provides some perspective on how channel stewards, a closely related concept, can work.

Topshop’s unique combination of
fashion, value, and fun is finding
success both inside and outside the
United Kingdom.

432

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Marketing Insight
Channel Stewards Take Charge
Harvard’s V. Kasturi Rangan believes companies should adopt a new approach to going to market—channel stewardship. Rangan defines
channel stewardship as the ability of a given participant in a distribution
channel—a steward—to create a go-to-market strategy that simultaneously addresses customers’ best interests and drives profits for all
channel partners. The channel steward accomplishes channel coordination without issuing commands or directives by persuading channel
partners to act in the best interest of all.
A channel steward might be the maker of the product or service
(Procter & Gamble or American Airlines), the maker of a key component
(microchip maker Intel), the supplier or assembler (Dell or Arrow
Electronics), or the distributor (W.W. Grainger) or retailer (Walmart).
Within a company, stewardship might rest with the CEO, a top manager,
or a team of senior managers.
Channel stewardship should appeal to any organization that wants
to bring a disciplined approach to channel strategy. With the customer’s
point of view in mind, the steward advocates for change among all
participants, transforming them into partners with a common purpose.
Channel stewardship has two important outcomes. First it expands
value for the steward’s customers, enlarging the market or existing

customers’ purchases through the channel. A second outcome is to
create a more tightly woven and yet adaptable channel, in which valuable members are rewarded and the less valuable members are
weeded out.
Rangan outlines three key disciplines of channel management:
1. Mapping at the industry level provides a comprehensive view of
the key determinants of channel strategy and how they are evolving. It identifies current best practices and gaps, and it projects
future requirements.
2. Building and editing assesses the producer’s own channels to identify any deficits in meeting customers’ needs and/or competitive
best practices to put together a new and improved overall system.
3. Aligning and influencing closes the gaps and works out a compensation package in tune with effort and performance for channel
members that add or could add value.
Channel stewardship works at the customer level, not at the level of
channel institutions. Thus, channel managers can adapt their fulfillment
of customer needs without having to change channel structure all at
once. An evolutionary approach to channel change, stewardship requires
constant monitoring, learning, and adaptation, but all in the best interests
of customers, channel partners, and channel steward. A channel steward
need not be a huge company or market leader; Rangan cites smaller
players, such as Haworth and Atlas Copco, as well as distributors and retailers such as Walmart, Best Buy, and HEB (supermarkets).
Sources: V. Kasturi Rangan, Transforming Your Go-to-Market Strategy: The Three
Disciplines of Channel Management (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2006); Kash Rangan, “Channel Stewardship: An Introductory Guide,”
www.channelstewardship.com; Partha Rose and Romit Dey, “Channel
Stewardship: Driving Profitable Revenue Growth in High-Tech with Multi-Channel
Management,” Infosys ViewPoint, August 2007.

Vertical marketing systems (VMSs) arose from strong channel members’ attempts to control
channel behavior and eliminate conflict over independent members pursuing their own objectives.
VMSs achieve economies through size, bargaining power, and elimination of duplicated services.
Business buyers of complex products and systems value the extensive exchange of information they
can obtain from a VMS,47 and VMSs have become the dominant mode of distribution in the U.S.
consumer marketplace, serving 70 percent to 80 percent of the market. There are three types:
corporate, administered, and contractual.

CORPORATE VMS A corporate VMS combines successive stages of production and
distribution under single ownership. Sears for years obtained over half the goods it sells from
companies it partly or wholly owned. Sherwin-Williams makes paint but also owns and operates
3,300 retail outlets.
ADMINISTERED VMS An administered VMS coordinates successive stages of production and
distribution through the size and power of one of the members. Manufacturers of dominant brands
can secure strong trade cooperation and support from resellers. Thus Kodak, Gillette, and Campbell
Soup command high levels of cooperation from their resellers in connection with displays, shelf
space, promotions, and price policies. The most advanced supply-distributor arrangement for
administered VMSs relies on distribution programming, which builds a planned, professionally
managed, vertical marketing system that meets the needs of both manufacturer and distributors.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

CONTRACTUAL VMS A contractual VMS consists of independent firms at different levels of
production and distribution, integrating their programs on a contractual basis to obtain more
economies or sales impact than they could achieve alone.48 Sometimes thought of as “value-adding
partnerships” (VAPs), contractual VMSs come in three types:
1.

2.

3.

Wholesaler-sponsored voluntary chains—Wholesalers organize voluntary chains of independent retailers to help standardize their selling practices and achieve buying economies in competing with large chain organizations.
Retailer cooperatives—Retailers take the initiative and organize a new business entity to carry
on wholesaling and possibly some production. Members concentrate their purchases through
the retailer co-op and plan their advertising jointly. Profits pass back to members in proportion to their purchases. Nonmember retailers can also buy through the co-op but do not share
in the profits.
Franchise organizations—A channel member called a franchisor might link several successive
stages in the production-distribution process. Franchising has been the fastest-growing retailing development in recent years.

Although the basic idea is an old one, some forms of franchising are quite new. The traditional system is the manufacturer-sponsored retailer franchise. Ford licenses independent businesspeople to sell its cars who agree to meet specified conditions of sales and services. Another
system is the manufacturer-sponsored wholesaler franchise. Coca-Cola licenses bottlers (wholesalers) in various markets that buy its syrup concentrate and then carbonate, bottle, and sell it
to retailers in local markets. A newer system is the service-firm-sponsored retailer franchise, organized by a service firm to bring its service efficiently to consumers. We find examples in auto
rental (Hertz and Avis), fast food (McDonald’s and Burger King), and the motel business
(Howard Johnson and Ramada Inn). In a dual distribution system, firms use both vertical integration (the franchisor actually owns and runs the units) and market governance (the franchisor licenses the units to other franchisees).49

THE NEW COMPETITION IN RETAILING Many independent retailers that have not
joined VMSs have developed specialty stores serving special market segments. The result is a
polarization in retailing between large vertical marketing organizations and independent specialty
stores, which creates a problem for manufacturers. They are strongly tied to independent
intermediaries but must eventually realign themselves with the high-growth vertical marketing
systems on less attractive terms. Furthermore, vertical marketing systems constantly threaten to
bypass large manufacturers and set up their own manufacturing. The new competition in retailing
is no longer between independent business units but between whole systems of centrally
programmed networks (corporate, administered, and contractual), competing against one another
to achieve the best cost economies and customer response.

Horizontal Marketing Systems
Another channel development is the horizontal marketing system, in which two or more unrelated companies put together resources or programs to exploit an emerging marketing opportunity. Each company lacks the capital, know-how, production, or marketing resources to venture
alone, or it is afraid of the risk. The companies might work together on a temporary or permanent
basis or create a joint venture company.
For example, many supermarket chains have arrangements with local banks to offer in-store
banking. Citizens Bank has over 523 branches in supermarkets, making up roughly 35 percent of its
branch network. Citizens’s staff members in these locations are more sales oriented, younger, and
more likely to have some retail sales background than staff in the traditional brick-and-mortar
branches.50

Integrating Multichannel Marketing Systems
Most companies today have adopted multichannel marketing. Disney sells its DVDs through five
main channels: movie rental stores such as Blockbuster, Disney Stores (now owned and run by The
Children’s Place), retail stores such as Best Buy, online retailers such as Disney’s own online stores

| CHAPTER 15

433

434

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

and Amazon.com, and the Disney catalog and other catalog sellers. This variety affords Disney
maximum market coverage and enables it to offer its videos at a number of price points.51 Here are
some of the channel options for leather goods maker Coach.

Coach

Coach markets a high-end line of luxury handbags, briefcases, luggage,
and accessories. Roughly 84 percent of its sales are via the Internet, catalog, company
retail stores in North America, Japan, Hong Kong, Macau and mainland China, and its North
American outlet stores. Coach also has store-in-store offerings in Japan and China inside
major department stores. Ten percent of sales are from 930 U.S. department store locations, such as Macy’s (including Bloomingdale’s), Dillard’s, Nordstrom,
Saks (including Carson’s) and Lord & Taylor, as well as some of those
retailer’s Web sites. Five percent of sales are from international wholesalers in 20 countries, mostly department stores. Finally, Coach has
licensing relationships with Movado (watches), Jimlar (footwear), and
Marchon (eyewear). These licensed products are sometimes sold in
other channels such as jewelry stores, high-end shoe stores, and
optical retailers.52

Luxury goods maker Coach has a
variety of carefully selected and
managed channel options.

An integrated marketing channel system is one in which the
strategies and tactics of selling through one channel reflect
the strategies and tactics of selling through one or more other
channels. Adding more channels gives companies three important
benefits. The first is increased market coverage. Not only are more
customers able to shop for the company’s products in more places,
but those who buy in more than one channel are often more profitable than single-channel customers. 53 The second benefit is
lower channel cost—selling by phone is cheaper than personal selling to small customers. The
third is more customized selling—such as by adding a technical sales force to sell complex
equipment.
There is a trade-off, however. New channels typically introduce conflict and problems with control and cooperation. Two or more may end up competing for the same customers.
Clearly, companies need to think through their channel architecture and determine which channels should perform which functions.
Figure 15.6 shows a simple grid to help make channel
architecture decisions. The grid consists of major marketing channels (as rows) and the major
channel tasks to be completed (as columns).54
The grid illustrates why using only one channel is not efficient. Consider a direct sales
force. A salesperson would have to find leads, qualify them, presell, close the sale, provide service, and manage account growth. An integrated multichannel approach would be better. The
company’s marketing department could run a preselling campaign informing prospects about
the company’s products through advertising, direct mail, and telemarketing; generate leads
through telemarketing, direct mail, advertising, and trade shows; and qualify leads into hot,
warm, and cool. The salesperson enters when the prospect is ready to talk business and invests
his or her costly time primarily in closing the sale. This multichannel architecture optimizes
coverage, customization, and control while minimizing cost and conflict.
Companies should use different sales channels for different-sized business customers—a direct sales force for large customers, telemarketing for midsize customers, and distributors for
small customers—but be alert for conflict over account ownership. For example, territory-based
sales representatives may want credit for all sales in their territories, regardless of the marketing
channel used.
Multichannel marketers also need to decide how much of their product to offer in each
of the channels. Patagonia views the Web as the ideal channel for showing off its entire line
of goods, given that its 20 stores and 5 outlets are limited by space to offering a selection
only, and even its catalog promotes less than 70 percent of its total merchandise. 55 Other
marketers prefer to limit their online offerings, theorizing that customers look to Web sites

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

| CHAPTER 15

Demand-generation Tasks
Gather
Develop &
Reach
relevant
disseminate
price
Place
information communications agreements orders

Acquire
funds for
inventories

Assume
risks

Facilitate
product
storage &
movement

Facilitate
payment

Oversee
ownership
transfer

National account
management

Telemarketing
Direct mail
Retail stores
Distributors
Dealers and valueadded resellers

|Fig. 15.6|

The Hybrid Grid
Source: Adapted from Rowland T. Moriarty and Ursula Moran, “Marketing Hybrid Marketing Systems,” Harvard Business Review, November–December, 1990, p. 150.

and catalogs for a “best of ” array of merchandise and don’t want to have to click through
dozens of pages.

Conflict, Cooperation,
and Competition
No matter how well channels are designed and managed, there will be some conflict, if only because
the interests of independent business entities do not always coincide. Channel conflict is generated
when one channel member’s actions prevent another channel from achieving its goal. Software giant Oracle Corp., plagued by channel conflict between its sales force and its vendor partners, decided to roll out new “All Partner Territories” where all deals except for specific strategic accounts
would go through select Oracle partners.56
Channel coordination occurs when channel members are brought together to advance the
goals of the channel, as opposed to their own potentially incompatible goals.57 Here we examine
three questions: What types of conflict arise in channels? What causes conflict? What can marketers
do to resolve it?

Types of Conflict and Competition
Suppose a manufacturer sets up a vertical channel consisting of wholesalers and retailers hoping
for channel cooperation and greater profits for each member. Yet horizontal, vertical, and multichannel conflict can occur.
•

•

Horizontal channel conflict occurs between channel members at the same level. Some Pizza
Inn franchisees complained about others cheating on ingredients, providing poor service, and
hurting the overall brand image.
Vertical channel conflict occurs between different levels of the channel. When
Estée Lauder set up a Web site to sell its Clinique and Bobbi Brown brands, the department

CUSTOMER

Direct sales
VENDOR

Marketing Channels and Methods

Internet

435

436

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

When Goodyear expanded its
channels to include mass-market
retailers, it angered its long-time
independent dealers.

•

store Dayton Hudson reduced its space for Estée Lauder products. 58 Greater retailer
consolidation—the 10 largest U.S. retailers account for over 80 percent of the average manufacturer’s business—has led to increased price pressure and influence from retailers.59
Walmart, for example, is the principal buyer for many manufacturers, including Disney,
Procter & Gamble, and Revlon, and is able to command reduced prices or quantity
discounts from these and other suppliers.60
Multichannel conflict exists when the manufacturer has established two or more channels
that sell to the same market.61 It’s likely to be especially intense when the members of one
channel get a lower price (based on larger-volume purchases) or work with a lower margin.
When Goodyear began selling its popular tire brands through Sears, Walmart, and Discount
Tire, it angered its independent dealers and eventually placated them by offering exclusive tire
models not sold in other retail outlets.

Causes of Channel Conflict
Some causes of channel conflict are easy to resolve, others are not. Conflict may arise from:
•

•

•

•

Goal incompatibility. The manufacturer may want to achieve rapid market penetration
through a low-price policy. Dealers, in contrast, may prefer to work with high margins and
pursue short-run profitability.
Unclear roles and rights. HP may sell personal computers to large accounts through its own
sales force, but its licensed dealers may also be trying to sell to large accounts. Territory boundaries and credit for sales often produce conflict.
Differences in perception. The manufacturer may be optimistic about the short-term economic outlook and want dealers to carry higher inventory. Dealers may be pessimistic. In the
beverage category, it is not uncommon for disputes to arise between manufacturers and their
distributors about the optimal advertising strategy.
Intermediaries’ dependence on the manufacturer. The fortunes of exclusive dealers, such as
auto dealers, are profoundly affected by the manufacturer’s product and pricing decisions.
This situation creates a high potential for conflict.

Managing Channel Conflict
Some channel conflict can be constructive and lead to better adaptation to a changing environment, but too much is dysfunctional.62 The challenge is not to eliminate all conflict, which is

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

TABLE 15.2

Strategies to Manage Channel Conflict

Strategic justification
Dual compensation
Superordinate goals
Employee exchange
Joint memberships
Co-optation
Diplomacy, mediation, or arbitration
Legal recourse

impossible, but to manage it better. There are a number of mechanisms for effective conflict
management (see
Table 15.2).63

Strategic Justification In some cases, a convincing strategic justification that they serve
distinctive segments and do not compete as much as they might think can reduce potential for
conflict among channel members. Developing special versions of products for different channel
members—branded variants as described in Chapter 9—is a clear way to demonstrate that
distinctiveness.

Dual Compensation Dual compensation pays existing channels for sales made through
new channels. When Allstate started selling insurance online, it agreed to pay agents a
2 percent commission for face-to-face service to customers who got their quotes on the Web.
Although lower than the agents’ typical 10 percent commission for offline transactions, it did
reduce tensions.64
Superordinate Goals Channel members can come to an agreement on the fundamental or
superordinate goal they are jointly seeking, whether it is survival, market share, high quality, or
customer satisfaction. They usually do this when the channel faces an outside threat, such as a more
efficient competing channel, an adverse piece of legislation, or a shift in consumer desires.
Employee Exchange A useful step is to exchange persons between two or more channel levels.
GM’s executives might agree to work for a short time in some dealerships, and some dealership
owners might work in GM’s dealer policy department. Thus participants can grow to appreciate
each other’s point of view.

Joint Memberships Similarly, marketers can encourage joint memberships in trade associations.
Good cooperation between the Grocery Manufacturers of America and the Food Marketing
Institute, which represents most of the food chains, led to the development of the universal product
code (UPC). The associations can consider issues between food manufacturers and retailers and
resolve them in an orderly way.
Co-option Co-optation is an effort by one organization to win the support of the leaders of
another by including them in advisory councils, boards of directors, and the like. If the
organization treats invited leaders seriously and listens to their opinions, co-optation can
reduce conflict, but the initiator may need to compromise its policies and plans to win
outsiders’ support.

Diplomacy, Mediation, and Arbitration When conflict is chronic or acute, the parties may
need to resort to stronger means. Diplomacy takes place when each side sends a person or group to
meet with its counterpart to resolve the conflict. Mediation relies on a neutral third party skilled in

| CHAPTER 15

437

438

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

conciliating the two parties’ interests. In arbitration two parties agree to present their arguments to
one or more arbitrators and accept their decision.

Legal Recourse If nothing else proves effective, a channel partner may choose to file a lawsuit.
When Coca-Cola decided to distribute Powerade thirst quencher directly to Walmart’s regional
warehouses, 60 bottlers complained the practice would undermine their core direct-storedistribution (DSD) duties and filed a lawsuit. A settlement allowed for the mutual exploration of
new service and distribution systems to supplement the DSD system.65

Dilution and Cannibalization
Marketers must be careful not to dilute their brands through inappropriate channels, particularly luxury brands whose images often rest on exclusivity and personalized service.
Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger took a hit when they sold too many of their products in
discount channels.
To reach affluent shoppers who work long hours and have little time to shop, high-end fashion brands such as Dior, Louis Vuitton, and Fendi have unveiled e-commerce sites as a way for
customers to research items before walking into a store, and a means to help combat fakes sold
on the Internet. Given the lengths to which these brands go to pamper customers in their
stores—doormen, glasses of champagne, extravagant surroundings—they have had to work hard
to provide a high-quality experience online.66

Legal and Ethical Issues in Channel Relations
Companies are generally free to develop whatever channel arrangements suit them. In fact, the law
seeks to prevent them from using exclusionary tactics that might keep competitors from using a
channel. Here we briefly consider the legality of certain practices, including exclusive dealing,
exclusive territories, tying agreements, and dealers’ rights.
With exclusive distribution, only certain outlets are allowed to carry a seller’s products.
Requiring that these dealers not handle competitors’ products is called exclusive dealing. Both parties benefit from exclusive arrangements: The seller obtains more loyal and dependable outlets, and
the dealers obtain a steady supply of special products and stronger seller support. Exclusive
arrangements are legal as long as they do not substantially lessen competition or tend to create a
monopoly, and as long as both parties enter into them voluntarily.
Exclusive dealing often includes exclusive territorial agreements. The producer may agree not to
sell to other dealers in a given area, or the buyer may agree to sell only in its own territory. The first
practice increases dealer enthusiasm and commitment. It is also perfectly legal—a seller has no
legal obligation to sell through more outlets than it wishes. The second practice, whereby the producer tries to keep a dealer from selling outside its territory, has become a major legal issue. One
bitter lawsuit was brought by GT Bicycles of Santa Ana, California, against the giant PriceCostco
chain, which sold 2,600 of its high-priced mountain bikes at a huge discount, upsetting GT’s other
U.S. dealers. GT alleges that it first sold the bikes to a dealer in Russia and that they were meant for
sale only in Russia. The firm maintains that when discounters work with middlemen to get exclusive goods, it constitutes fraud.67
Producers of a strong brand sometimes sell it to dealers only if they will take some or all of the
rest of the line. This practice is called full-line forcing. Such tying agreements are not necessarily
illegal, but they do violate U.S. law if they tend to lessen competition substantially.
Producers are free to select their dealers, but their right to terminate dealers is somewhat restricted.
In general, sellers can drop dealers “for cause,” but they cannot drop dealers if, for example, they refuse
to cooperate in a doubtful legal arrangement, such as exclusive dealing or tying agreements.

E-Commerce Marketing Practices
E-commerce uses a Web site to transact or facilitate the sale of products and services online. Online
retail sales have exploded in recent years, and it is easy to see why. Online retailers can predictably
provide convenient, informative, and personalized experiences for vastly different types of

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

consumers and businesses. By saving the cost of retail floor space, staff, and inventory, online retailers can profitably sell low-volume products to niche markets. Online retailers compete in three key
aspects of a transaction: (1) customer interaction with the Web site, (2) delivery, and (3) ability to
address problems when they occur.68
We can distinguish between pure-click companies, those that have launched a Web site without
any previous existence as a firm, and brick-and-click companies, existing companies that have
added an online site for information or e-commerce.

Pure-Click Companies
There are several kinds of pure-click companies: search engines, Internet service providers (ISPs),
commerce sites, transaction sites, content sites, and enabler sites. Commerce sites sell all types of
products and services, notably books, music, toys, insurance, stocks, clothes, financial services, and
so on. They use various strategies to compete: AutoNation is a leading metamediary of car buying
and related services; Hotels.com is the information leader in hotel reservations; Buy.com leads on
price; and Wine Spectator is a single-category specialist.

E-COMMERCE SUCCESS FACTORS Companies must set up and operate their
e-commerce Web sites carefully. Customer service is critical. Online shoppers may select an item
for purchase but fail to complete the transaction—one estimate of the conversion rate of Internet
shoppers in March 2008 was only about 35 percent. Worse, only 2 percent to 3 percent of visits to
online retailers lead to sales, compared with 5 percent of visits to department stores.69 To improve
conversion rates, firms should make the Web site fast, simple, and easy to use. Something as
simple as enlarging product images on-screen can increase perusal time and the amount
customers buy.70
Consumer surveys suggest that the most significant inhibitors of online shopping are the
absence of pleasurable experiences, social interaction, and personal consultation with a company representative.71 Firms are responding. Many now offer live online chat to give potential
customers immediate advice about products and suggest purchasing additional items. When a
representative is active in the sale, the average amount per order is typically higher. B2B
marketers also need to put a human face on their e-commerce presence, and some are taking
advantage of Web 2.0 technologies such as virtual environments, blogs, online videos, and
click-to-chat.
To increase customer satisfaction and the entertainment and information value of Web-based
shopping experiences, some firms are employing avatars, graphical representations of virtual, animated characters that act as company representatives, personal shopping assistants, Web site
guides, or conversation partners. Avatars can enhance the effectiveness of a Web-based sales channel, especially if they are seen as expert or attractive.72
Ensuring security and privacy online remains important. Customers must find the Web site
trustworthy, even if it represents an already highly credible offline firm. Investments in Web site
design and processes can help reassure customers sensitive to online risk.73 Online retailers
are also trying new technologies such as blogs, social networks, and mobile marketing to attract
new shoppers.
B2B E-COMMERCE Although business-to-consumer (B2C) Web sites have attracted much
attention in the media, even more activity is being conducted on business-to-business (B2B) sites,
which are changing the supplier–customer relationship in profound ways.
In the past, buyers exerted a lot of effort to gather information about worldwide suppliers. B2B
sites make markets more efficient, giving buyers easy access to a great deal of information from
(1) supplier Web sites; (2) infomediaries, third parties that add value by aggregating information
about alternatives; (3) market makers, third parties that link buyers and sellers; and (4) customer
communities, where buyers can swap stories about suppliers’ products and services.74 Firms are
using B2B auction sites, spot exchanges, online product catalogs, barter sites, and other online
resources to obtain better prices. Ironically, the largest of the B2B market makers is Alibaba,
homegrown in China where businesses have faced decades of Communist antipathy to private
enterprise.

| CHAPTER 15

439

440

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Alibaba

The effect of these mechanisms is to make prices more transparent.76 For undifferentiated
products, price pressure will increase. For highly differentiated products, buyers will gain a better
picture of the items’ true value. Suppliers of superior products will be able to offset price transparency with value transparency; suppliers of undifferentiated products will need to drive down
their costs in order to compete.

Brick-and-Click Companies
Although many brick-and-mortar companies may have initially debated whether to add an online
e-commerce channel for fear of channel conflict with their offline retailers, agents, or their own
stores, most eventually added the Internet as a distribution channel after seeing how much business
was generated online.77 Even Procter & Gamble, which used traditional physical channels of distribution exclusively for years, is selling some big brands such as Tide, Pampers, and Olay online, in
part to be able to examine consumer shopping habits more closely.78 Managing the online and
offline channels has thus become a priority for many firms.79
Adding an e-commerce channel creates the possibility of a backlash from retailers, brokers,
agents, and other intermediaries. The question is how to sell both through intermediaries and
online. There are at least three strategies for trying to gain acceptance from intermediaries.
One, offer different brands or products on the Internet. Two, offer offline partners higher
commissions to cushion the negative impact on sales. Three, take orders on the Web site but
have retailers deliver and collect payment. Harley-Davidson decided to tread carefully before
going online.
Harley-Davidson

Jack Ma has been the visionary
force behind the highly successful
Chinese online marketplace and
auction site Alibaba.

The brainchild of Jack Ma, Alibaba began in 1999 and grew over the
next decade to become the world’s largest online B2B marketplace and Asia’s most popular
online auction site. Its numbers are staggering. The $9 billion company has 43 million
registered users (35 million in China and 10.5 million internationally) and hosts more than
5.5 million shop fronts; at any moment, more than 4 million businesses are trading. At
Alibaba’s heart are two B2B Web sites: alibaba.com, a marketplace for companies around the globe to
buy and sell in English, and china.alibaba, a domestic Chinese marketplace. The Chinese powerhouse
has a nationalist agenda: to build markets for China’s vast number of small and medium-sized
businesses. Alibaba enables these businesses to trade with each other and link to global supply
chains. To establish customer trust, the company set up TrustPass, in
which users pay Alibaba a fee to hire a third party that verifies them.
Users must have five people vouch for them and provide a list of all
their certificates/business licenses. Anyone on Alibaba who has
done business with a user is encouraged to comment on the firm, in
the same way buyers comment on sellers in Amazon.com’s or
eBay’s marketplace. Businesses are even starting to print “TrustPass”
on their business cards, a true sign of Alibaba’s B2B credibility.
Global growth has become a priority. Home pages in Spanish, German,
Italian, French, Portuguese, and Russian were launched in 2008 to
complement Chinese and U.S. options. After its IPO of $1.7 billion in
2007 (second only to Google’s among Internet firms), Alibaba, says
Jack Ma, will “create the e-commerce platform for 10 million small
enterprises creating 100 million jobs around the world and providing
an online retail platform to supply the everyday needs of 1 billion
people.”75

Harley-Davidson

Given that Harley sells more than $860 million worth
of parts and accessories to its loyal followers, an online venture was an obvious next step
to generate even more revenue. Harley needed to be careful, however, to avoid the wrath
of 850 dealers who benefited from the high margins on those sales. Its solution was to

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

send customers seeking to buy accessories online to the company’s Web site. Before they can buy
anything, they are prompted to select a participating Harley-Davidson dealer. When the customer
places the order, it is transmitted to the selected dealer for fulfillment, ensuring that the dealer still remains the focal point of the customer experience. Dealers, in turn, agreed to a number of standards,
such as checking for orders twice a day and shipping promptly. The Web site now gets more than
1 million visitors a month.80
Many brick-and-click retailers are trying to give their customers more control over their
shopping experiences by bringing Web technologies into the store. Food Lion has experimented
with personal scanners so customers can keep track of their supermarket purchases. Barnes &
Noble has kiosks that allow customers to search inventory, locate merchandise, and order outof-stock items.81

M-Commerce Marketing Practices

Dunkin’ Donuts

The widespread penetration of cell phones and smart phones—there are currently more mobile
phones than personal computers in the world—allows people to connect to the Internet and place
online orders on the move. Many see a big future in what is now called m-commerce (m for
mobile).82 The existence of mobile channels and media can keep consumers connected and interacting with a brand throughout their day-to-day lives. GPS-type features can help identify shopping or purchase opportunities for consumers for their favorite brands.
Although in 2009 only one in five phones in the United States was a smart phone such as an
iPhone or BlackBerry, sales of smart phones are forecast to exceed those of regular phones by 2011.
As their penetration and adoption of 3G increases, and as easy payment options and various apps
for mobile phones are developed, m-commerce will take off. By 2015, more people are expected to
access the Internet with mobile phones than with PCs.83
In some countries, m-commerce already has a strong foothold. Millions of Japanese teenagers
carry DOCOMO phones available from NTT (Nippon Telephone and Telegraph). They can also
use their phones to order goods. Each month, the subscriber receives a bill from NTT listing the
monthly subscriber fee, the usage fee, and the cost of all the transactions. Bills can be paid at the
nearest 7-Eleven store.
In the United States, mobile marketing is becoming more prevalent and taking all forms.84
Retailers such as Amazon.com, CVS, and Sears have launched m-commerce sites that allow consumers to buy books, medicine, and even lawn mowers from their smart phones. The travel industry
has used m-commerce to target businesspeople who need to book air or hotel reservations while on
the move.85
One Nordstrom salesperson increased the amount of merchandise he sold by 37 percent by
sending text messages and e-mails of news and promotions to the cell phones of his customers.86
Mobile marketing can have influence inside the store too. Consumers increasingly are using a cell
phone to text a friend or relative about a product while shopping.
Here is how Dunkin’ Donuts developed an m-commerce strategy to complement its broader
marketing efforts.

Dunkin’ Donuts

Dunkin’ Donuts targets busy people on the go, serving 2.7 million customers daily at approximately 8,800 stores in 31 countries, including
roughly 6,400 U.S. locations. Portability remains an essential part of the value proposition, evidenced in the campaign theme, “America Runs on Dunkin.’” Knowing that many
customers make a “Dunkin’ Run” or visit, especially in the afternoon to bring back goodies for others, the company introduced new interactive Web tools and an iPhone application to create
a social group ordering experience. The Dunkin’ Run mobile campaign featured interactive alerts set
to a customer’s list of friends or coworkers, telling them when a trip to Dunkin’ Donuts was planned,
along with a personal message inviting them to place an order online. Invitees could view the menu
to make an order or use a personalized list of favorites. All the orders were integrated onto a single
screen that the runner could print out or display on a mobile and bring to the store. Dunkin’ Run was

| CHAPTER 15

441

442

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

not the company’s first mobile marketing effort. An earlier two-month SMS promotional campaign in
Italy increased sales almost 10 percent.87
Mobile marketing and the fact that a company can potentially pinpoint a customer or
employee’s location with GPS technology also raises privacy issues. What if an employer learns an
employee is being treated for AIDS at a local clinic, or a wife finds her husband is out clubbing? Like
so many new technologies, location-based services have potential for good or harm and ultimately
will warrant public scrutiny and regulation.

Summary
1. Most producers do not sell their goods directly to final
users. Between producers and final users stands one or
more marketing channels, a host of marketing intermediaries performing a variety of functions.
2. Marketing channel decisions are among the most critical
decisions facing management. The company’s chosen
channel(s) profoundly affect all other marketing decisions.
3. Companies use intermediaries when they lack the
financial resources to carry out direct marketing, when
direct marketing is not feasible, and when they can earn
more by doing so. The most important functions
performed by intermediaries are information, promotion,
negotiation, ordering, financing, risk taking, physical
possession, payment, and title.
4. Manufacturers have many alternatives for reaching a
market. They can sell direct or use one-, two-, or threelevel channels. Deciding which type(s) of channel to use
calls for analyzing customer needs, establishing channel
objectives, and identifying and evaluating the major
alternatives, including the types and numbers of intermediaries involved in the channel.
5. Effective channel management calls for selecting intermediaries and training and motivating them. The goal is
to build a long-term partnership that will be profitable for
all channel members.

6. Marketing channels are characterized by continuous
and sometimes dramatic change. Three of the most
important trends are the growth of vertical marketing
systems, horizontal marketing systems, and multichannel
marketing systems.
7. All marketing channels have the potential for conflict
and competition resulting from such sources as goal
incompatibility, poorly defined roles and rights, perceptual differences, and interdependent relationships.
There are a number of different approaches companies
can take to try to manage conflict.
8. Channel arrangements are up to the company, but
there are certain legal and ethical issues to be considered with regard to practices such as exclusive dealing
or territories, tying agreements, and dealers’ rights.
9. E-commerce has grown in importance as companies
have adopted “brick-and-click” channel systems.
Channel integration must recognize the distinctive
strengths of online and offline selling and maximize their
joint contributions.
10. An area of increasing importance is m-commerce and
marketing through smart phones and PDAs.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Does It Matter Where You Sell?

Marketing Discussion
Channel Integrations

Some marketers feel that the image of the particular channel in which they sell their products does not matter—all
that matters is that the right customers shop there and the
product is displayed in the right way. Others maintain that
channel images—such as a retail store—can be critical and
must be consistent with the image of the product.
Take a position: Channel images do not really affect
the brand images of the products they sell that much
versus Channel images must be consistent with the
brand image.

Think of your favorite retailers. How have they integrated their
channel system? How would you like their channels to be integrated? Do you use multiple channels from them? Why?

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

Marketing Excellence

>>Amazon.com

Founded by Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com started as the
“world’s largest bookstore” in July 1995. A virtual bookstore that physically owned no books, Amazon.com
promised to revolutionize retailing. Although some may
debate whether it accomplished that, Bezos clearly
blazed a trail of e-commerce innovations that many have
studied and followed.
Amazon.com set out to create personalized storefronts for each customer by providing more useful information and more choices than could be found in your
typical neighborhood bookstore. Readers can review
books and evaluate them on a one- to five-star rating
scale, and browsers can rate the reviews for helpfulness.
Amazon.com’s personal recommendation service aggregates data on buying patterns to infer who might like
which book. The site offers peeks into books’ contents,
index, and beginning pages with a “search inside the
book” feature that also lets customers search the entire
text of 120,000 books—about as many titles as are in a
Barnes & Noble bookstore. Amazon.com’s one-click
shopping lets buyers make purchases with one click.
Over the years, Amazon.com has diversified its
product lines into DVDs, music CDs, computer software, video games, electronics, apparel, furniture, food,
toys, and more. In addition, it has established separate
Web sites in Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany,
France, China, and Japan. Amazon.com continued to
expand its product offerings with the 2007 launch of
Amazon Video On Demand, allowing consumers to rent
or purchase films and television shows on their computers or televisions. Later that year, Amazon.com introduced Amazon MP3, which competes directly with
Apple’s iTunes and has participation from all the major
music labels. The company’s most successful recent
product launch was the Amazon-branded Kindle, an

| CHAPTER 15

443

electronic book reader that can deliver hundreds of
thousands of books, magazines, blogs, and newspapers wirelessly in a matter of seconds. As thin as a
magazine and light as a paperback, the device was
Amazon.com’s number one selling product in 2009.
To overcome the lag between purchase and delivery
of product, Amazon.com offers fast, inexpensive shipping. For a $79 annual fee, Amazon.com Prime provides
unlimited free express shipping for most items. While free
shipping and price cuts are sometimes unpopular with investors, Bezos believes it builds customer satisfaction,
loyalty, and frequency of purchase orders.
Amazon.com has established itself as an electronic
marketplace by enabling merchants of all kinds to sell
items on the site. It powers and operates retail Web sites
for Target, the NBA, Timex, and Marks & Spencer.
Amazon.com derives about 40 percent of its sales from
its million-plus affiliates called “Associates,” independent
sellers or businesses that receive commissions for referring customers who then make a purchase at the
Amazon.com site. Associates can refer consumers to
Amazon.com through a variety of ways, including direct
links and banner ads as well as Amazon Widgets, miniapplications that feature Amazon.com’s wide selection of
products.
Amazon.com also launched an affiliate product
called aStore, which gives Associates the ability to create an Amazon-operated online store easily and without
any programming knowledge. Amazon.com then supports these merchants by providing new tools for their
Web site, offering access to Amazon.com’s catalog of
products, and handling all payments and payment security through its Web Services. Amazon.com can also
“pick, pack and ship the products to the merchant’s
customers anytime and to any place” through its
Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA). This essentially creates a
virtual store for the third-party merchants with low risk
and no additional cost.
One key to Amazon.com’s success in all these different ventures was a willingness to invest in the latest
Internet technology to make shopping online faster, easier, and more personally rewarding for its customers and
third-party merchants. The company continues to invest
in technology, is focused on the long-term, and has successfully positioned itself as a technology company with
its wide range of Amazon Web Services. This growing
collection of infrastructure services meets the retailing
needs of companies of virtually all sizes.
From the beginning, Bezos stated that even though
he started as an online bookstore, he eventually wanted
to sell everything through Amazon.com. Now, with more
than 600 million annual visitors, the company continues to
get closer to that goal with revolutionary products like the
Kindle and cloud computing Web services.

444

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Questions
1. Why has Amazon.com succeeded online when so
many other companies have failed?
2. Will the Kindle revolutionize the book industry? Why
or why not?
3. What’s next for Amazon.com? Is cloud computing
the right direction for the company? Where else can it
grow?

Marketing Excellence

>>Costco

Costco’s mission is “to continually provide our members with quality goods and services
at the lowest possible prices.” With nearly 60 million cardcarrying members and over $71 billion in sales, Costco is
now the largest warehouse club chain in the United
States, the third largest retailer in the United States, and
the ninth largest retailer in the world. Costco’s success
comes from years of building consumer loyalty through its
dedicated merchandising and pricing strategy combined
with no-frills, cost-cutting policies.
Costco’s merchandising strategy focuses on offering
a broad range of brand name and private label merchandise at extremely low prices. But unlike a grocery store
that carries 40,000 SKUs or a Walmart that can carry up
to 150,000, Costco carries approximately 4,000 SKUs—
only the fastest-selling flavors, sizes, models, and colors
from a single vendor in each category. This efficient product sourcing results in several outcomes: high volume of
sales, rapid inventory turnover, extremely low prices, and
better product manageability.
Costco buys its merchandise directly from the manufacturer. Products are shipped directly to Costco warehouses or to a depot, which reallocates the shipments to
Costco warehouses within 24 hours. This process eliminates several steps such as using a distributor and other
intermediaries, eliminating costs associated with storage,

Sources: “Click to Download,” Economist, August 19, 2006, pp. 57–58; Robert D. Hof, “Jeff
Bezos’ Risky Bet,” BusinessWeek, November 13, 2006; Erick Schonfield, “The Great Giveaway,”
Business 2.0, April 2005, pp. 80–86; Elizabeth West, “Who’s Next?” Potentials, February 2004,
pp. 7–8; Robert D. Hof, “The Wizard of Web Retailing,” BusinessWeek, December 20, 2004,
p. 18; Chris Taylor, “Smart Library,” Time, November 17, 2003, p. 68; Deborah Solomon,
“Questions for Jeffrey P. Bezos,” New York Times, December 2, 2009; Patrick Seitz,
“Amazon.com Whiz Jeff Bezos Keeps Kindling Hot Concepts,” Investors’ Daily Business,
December 31, 2009; Amazon.com, Amazon.com 2009 Annual Report.

additional freight, and handling. At the warehouse, shipments are often taken directly to the floor, unwrapped,
and left on the pallet, ready to sell.
Over the years, Costco has expanded its products
and services from simple boxed items such as cereal and
paper products to more complex items such as fresh produce and flowers, which must be displayed attractively
and managed more closely. Today, it sells dairy, baked
goods, seafood, clothing, books, computer software,
vacuums, home appliances, electronics, jewelry, tires, art,
wine, liquor, hot tubs, and furniture. Costco’s services include pharmacies, optometrists, photo processors, food
courts, and gas stations. The company’s private label,
Kirkland Signature, provides consumers with high-quality
products at even more discounted prices than the comparable branded item. Kirkland Signature products range
from diapers to bed sheets to coffee and makeup.
Of the 4,000 products sold, 3,000 are staples, found
at Costco week after week, while the remaining 1,000
rotate as part of Costco’s “treasure hunt.” These special
items are offered only temporarily and can be as exotic as
Coach bags, Waterford crystal, and expensive jewelry.
Costco believes its treasure hunt items create excitement
and increase consumer loyalty, bringing back bargain
hunters again and again.
Costco’s pricing strategy is transparent: The company limits the markup of any branded item to 14 percent
and any private-label item to 15 percent. (Supermarkets
and department stores mark up items anywhere from
25 percent to 50 percent.) If a manufacturer’s price is too
high, the company will not restock the item. Costco’s
CEO, Jim Sinegal, explained, “The traditional retailer will
say: ‘I’m selling this for $10. I wonder whether I can get
$10.50 or $11.’ We say: ‘We’re selling it for $9. How do
we get it down to $8?’”
Costco’s cost savings tactics extend to its 560+ warehouse locations around the world. Most average 143,000
square feet with floor plans designed to optimize selling
space, the handling of merchandise, and the control of inventory. Decor is simple: concrete floors, bare-bones signage,
and product displays that consist of pallets right off the

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING CHANNELS

truck. Central skylights and day-lighting controls monitor
energy usage, and Costco also saves by not supplying its
own shopping bags. Instead, consumers use leftover boxes
and crates stacked near cash registers to carry home their
purchases. Costco spends little on marketing and promotions, except for the occasional direct mail to prospective
new members and coupons to regular members.
The one place Costco does not cut costs is its employees. They are compensated well, and 85 percent have
health insurance, more than twice the percentage at Target
or Walmart. As a result, employee turnover and employee
theft are extremely low. Costco’s loyal consumer base appreciates the fact that its deep discounts come from strategic business planning and not at the workers’ expense.
Costco’s customers are not only loyal; many are affluent. The average household income is $74,000; 31 percent
earn more than $100,000 per year. The majority of consumers tend to be businesses or large families with
houses big enough to store bulk items. Membership at
Costco starts at $50 a year and can be upgraded to
Executive levels that provide additional benefits. Costco
accepts only debit cards, cash, checks, and American
Express, which charges Costco a very large interchange
fee. While consumers need membership to shop at the

| CHAPTER 15

445

warehouse locations, they can shop online without it. In
2008, 58 million consumers visited costco.com and nonmembers paid an addition 5 percent fee for any purchase.
Costco’s success has come from focusing on a
handful of business practices: sell a limited number of
items, keep costs down, rely on high volume, pay workers well, require consumers to buy memberships, and
target upscale consumers and business owners. This
vision has led to many achievements, including ranking
number 24 in the Fortune 500 and number 22 on
Fortune’s Most Admired list. Costco also became the
first company to grow from zero to $3 billion in sales in
less than six years.
Questions
1. What is unique about Costco’s channel management
process? What components can other retailers borrow
or implement?
2. Where can Costco improve? Should it offer more
products or advertise more? Why or why not?
Sources: Matthew Boyle, “Why Costco Is So Addictive,” Fortune, October 25, 2006; Steven
Greenhouse, “How Costco Became the Anti-Walmart,” New York Times, July 17, 2005; Costco,
Costco.com 2009 Annual Report.

446

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What major types of marketing
intermediaries occupy this
sector?
2. What marketing decisions do
these marketing intermediaries
make?
3. What are the major trends with
marketing intermediaries?
4. What does the future hold for
private label brands?

Cofounder Tony Hsieh has ensured that a
strong customer-service culture is at the
heart of operations at Zappos, the online
footwear and accessories retailer.

16

Managing Retailing,
Wholesaling, and Logistics
In the previous chapter, we examined marketing intermediaries from the
viewpoint of manufacturers who wanted to build and manage marketing channels. In this chapter,
we view these intermediaries—retailers, wholesalers, and logistical organizations—as requiring
and forging their own marketing strategies in a rapidly changing world. Intermediaries also strive
for marketing excellence and can reap the benefits like any other type of company.

Online footwear retailer Zappos was co-founded by Tony Hsieh in 1999 with superior
customer service and an improved customer experience at the core of its corporate culture. With free shipping and returns, 24/7 customer service, and fast turnaround on a
wide selection of 200,000 shoe styles from 1,200 makers, Zappos finds that threefourths of purchases during any one day are by repeat customers. Unlike many other
companies, Zappos has not outsourced its call centers; Hsieh sees that function as too important. In
fact, Zappos empowers its customer service reps to solve problems. When a customer called to complain that a pair of boots was leaking after a year of use, the customer service rep sent out a new pair
even though the company’s policy is that only unworn shoes are returnable. Every employee has a
chance each year to contribute a passage to the firm’s Culture Book,
about life at Zappos, and how each department implements superior
customer service from selling to warehousing and delivery, to pricing While innovative retailers such as Zappos, Sweden’s
H&M, Spain’s Zara and Mango, and Britain’s Topshop have
and billing. Half the interview process for potential new hires is devoted
thrived in recent years, others such as former U.S. stalwarts
to finding out whether they are sufficiently outgoing, open-minded, and
Gap, Home Depot, and Kmart have struggled. The more
creative to be a good cultural fit for the company. Bought by
successful intermediaries use strategic planning, advanced
Amazon.com in 2009 for a reported $850 million but still run separately, information systems, and sophisticated marketing tools. They
the company now also sells clothing, handbags, and accessories. segment their markets, improve their market targeting and
Thanks to its success, it even offers two-day, $4,000 seminars to busi- positioning, and aggressively pursue market expansion and
ness executives eager to learn about the secrets behind Zappos’s diversification strategies. In this chapter, we consider marketing
unique corporate culture and approach to customer service.1
excellence in retailing, wholesaling, and logistics.

Retailing
Retailing includes all the activities in selling goods or services directly to final consumers for personal, nonbusiness use. A retailer or retail store is any business enterprise whose sales volume
comes primarily from retailing.
Any organization selling to final consumers—whether it is a manufacturer, wholesaler, or
retailer—is doing retailing. It doesn’t matter how the goods or services are sold (in person, by mail,
telephone, vending machine, or on the Internet) or where (in a store, on the street, or in the consumer’s home).
After reviewing the different types of retailers and the new retail marketing environment, we examine the marketing decisions retailers make. The following are four examples of innovative retail
organizations that have experienced market success in recent years.
447

448

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Innovative Retail Organizations
Panera Bread. The $2.6 billion Panera Bread restaurant chain targets “food people who
understand and respond to food or those on the verge of that” by selling fresh “real” food–and
lots of warm bread—at full prices that customers are more than willing to pay. An unpretentious atmosphere—no table service, but no time limit—encourages
customers to linger. The brand is seen as family-oriented but also sophisticated, offering an appealing combination of fresh, customizable,
convenient, and affordable food.
GameStop. Video game and entertainment software retailer GameStop
has over 6,000 locations in malls and shopping strips all over the United
States, making it highly convenient for customers. Staffed by hard-core
gamers who like to connect with customers, GameStop boasts a trade-in
policy that gives customers credit for an old game traded in for a new one.
Lumber Liquidators. Lumber Liquidators buys excess wood directly
from lumber mills at a discount and stocks almost 350 kinds of hardwood
flooring, about the same as Lowe’s and Home Depot. It sells at lower
prices because it keeps operating costs down by cutting out the middlemen and locating stores in inexpensive locations. Lumber Liquidators also
knows a lot about its customers, such as the fact that shoppers who request product samples have a
30 percent likelihood of buying within a month, and that most tend to renovate one room at a time, not
the entire home at once.

Panera Bread appeals to food
lovers of all kinds.

Net-a-Porter. London-based Net-a-Porter is an online luxury clothing and accessories retailer
whose Web site combines the style of a fashion magazine with the thrill of shopping at a chic boutique.
Seen by its loyal customers as an authoritative fashion voice, Net-a-Porter stocks over 300 international brands, such as Jimmy Choo, Alexander McQueen, Stella McCartney, Givenchy, Marc Jacobs,
and others. The company ships to 170 countries and offers same-day delivery in London and
Manhattan; the average order is $250.
Sources: Kate Rockwood, “Rising Dough, Fast Company, October 2009, pp. 69–71; Devin Leonard, “GameStop Racks Up the Points,” Fortune,
June 9, 2008, pp. 109–22; Helen Coster, “Hardwood Hero,” Forbes, November 30, 2009, pp. 60–62; John Brodie, “The Amazon of Fashion,”
Fortune, September 14, 2009, pp. 86–95.

Types of Retailers
Consumers today can shop for goods and services at store retailers, nonstore retailers, and retail
organizations.

STORE RETAILERS Perhaps the best-known type of store retailer is the department store.
Japanese department stores such as Takashimaya and Mitsukoshi attract millions of shoppers each
year and feature art galleries, restaurants, cooking classes, fitness clubs, and children’s playgrounds.
The most important types of major store retailers are summarized in
Table 16.1.
Different formats of store retailers will have different competitive and price dynamics. Discount
stores, for example, compete much more intensely with each other than other formats.2 Retailers
also meet widely different consumer preferences for service levels and specific services. Specifically,
they position themselves as offering one of four levels of service:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Self-service—Self-service is the cornerstone of all discount operations. Many customers are
willing to carry out their own “locate-compare-select” process to save money.
Self-selection—Customers find their own goods, although they can ask for assistance.
Limited service—These retailers carry more shopping goods and services such as credit and
merchandise-return privileges. Customers need more information and assistance.
Full service—Salespeople are ready to assist in every phase of the “locate-compare-select”
process. Customers who like to be waited on prefer this type of store. The high staffing cost,
along with the higher proportion of specialty goods and slower-moving items and the many
services, result in high-cost retailing.

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

TABLE 16.1

Major Types of Store Retailers

Specialty store: Narrow product line. The Limited, The Body Shop.
Department store: Several product lines. JCPenney, Bloomingdale’s.
Supermarket: Large, low-cost, low-margin, high-volume, self-service store designed to meet total
needs for food and household products. Kroger, Safeway.
Convenience store: Small store in residential area, often open 24/7, limited line of high-turnover
convenience products plus takeout. 7-Eleven, Circle K.
Drug store: Prescription and pharmacies, health and beauty aids, other personal care, small
durable, miscellaneous items. CVS, Walgreens.
Discount store: Standard or specialty merchandise; low-price, low-margin, high-volume stores.
Walmart, Kmart.
Extreme value or hard-discount store: A more restricted merchandise mix than discount stores
but at even lower prices. Aldi, Lidl, Dollar General, Family Dollar.
Off-price retailer: Leftover goods, overruns, irregular merchandise sold at less than retail. Factory
outlets; independent off-price retailers such as TJ Maxx; warehouse clubs such as Costco.
Superstore: Huge selling space, routinely purchased food and household items, plus services (laundry,
shoe repair, dry cleaning, check cashing). Category killer (deep assortment in one category) such as
Staples; combination store such as Jewel-Osco; hypermarket (huge stores that combine supermarket,
discount, and warehouse retailing) such as Carrefour in France and Meijer in the Netherlands.
Catalog showroom: Broad selection of high-markup, fast-moving, brand-name goods sold by
catalog at a discount. Customers pick up merchandise at the store. Inside Edge Ski and Bike.
Source: Data from www.privatelabelmag.com.

NONSTORE RETAILING Although the overwhelming bulk of goods and services—
97 percent—is sold through stores, nonstore retailing has been growing much faster than store
retailing. Nonstore retailing falls into four major categories: direct selling, direct marketing (which
includes telemarketing and Internet selling), automatic vending, and buying services:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Direct selling, also called multilevel selling and network marketing, is a multibillion-dollar
industry, with hundreds of companies selling door-to-door or at home sales parties.
Well-known in one-to-one selling are Avon, Electrolux, and Southwestern Company of
Nashville (Bibles). Tupperware and Mary Kay Cosmetics are sold one-to-many: A salesperson
goes to the home of a host who has invited friends; the salesperson demonstrates the products
and takes orders. Pioneered by Amway, the multilevel (network) marketing sales system works
by recruiting independent businesspeople who act as distributors. The distributor’s compensation includes a percentage of sales made by those he or she recruits, as well as earnings on
direct sales to customers. These direct-selling firms, now finding fewer consumers at home, are
developing multidistribution strategies.
Direct marketing has roots in direct-mail and catalog marketing (Lands’ End, L.L.Bean); it
includes telemarketing (1-800-FLOWERS), television direct-response marketing (HSN, QVC),
and electronic shopping (Amazon.com, Autobytel.com). As people become more accustomed
to shopping on the Internet, they are ordering a greater variety of goods and services from a
wider range of Web sites. In the United States, online sales were estimated to be $210 billion in
2009, with travel being the biggest category ($80 billion).3
Automatic vending offers a variety of merchandise, including impulse goods such as soft
drinks, coffee, candy, newspapers, magazines, and other products such as hosiery, cosmetics,
hot food, and paperbacks. Vending machines are found in factories, offices, large retail stores,
gasoline stations, hotels, restaurants, and many other places. They offer 24-hour selling,
self-service, and merchandise that is stocked to be fresh. Japan has the most vending machines
per person—Coca-Cola has over 1 million machines there and annual vending sales of
$50 billion—twice its U.S. figures.
Buying service is a storeless retailer serving a specific clientele—usually employees of large
organizations—who are entitled to buy from a list of retailers that have agreed to give discounts in return for membership.

| CHAPTER 16

449

450

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

TABLE 16.2

Major Types of Corporate Retail Organizations

Corporate chain store: Two or more outlets owned and controlled, employing central buying and
merchandising, and selling similar lines of merchandise. Gap, Pottery Barn.
Voluntary chain: A wholesaler-sponsored group of independent retailers engaged in bulk buying and
common merchandising. Independent Grocers Alliance (IGA).
Retailer cooperative: Independent retailers using a central buying organization and joint promotion
efforts. Associated Grocers, ACE Hardware.
Consumer cooperative: A retail firm owned by its customers. Members contribute money to open
their own store, vote on its policies, elect a group to manage it, and receive dividends. Local cooperative grocery stores can be found in many markets.
Franchise organization: Contractual association between a franchisor and franchisees, popular in a
number of product and service areas. McDonald’s, Subway, Pizza Hut, Jiffy Lube, 7-Eleven.
Merchandising conglomerate: A corporation that combines several diversified retailing lines and
forms under central ownership, with some integration of distribution and management. Federated
Department Stores renamed itself after one of its best-known retailers, Macy’s, but also owns other
retailers such as Bloomingdale’s.

CORPORATE RETAILING AND FRANCHISING Although many retail stores are
independently owned, an increasing number are part of a corporate retailing organization. These
organizations achieve economies of scale, greater purchasing power, wider brand recognition, and
better-trained employees than independent stores can usually gain alone. The major types of
corporate retailing—corporate chain stores, voluntary chains, retailer and consumer cooperatives,
franchises, and merchandising conglomerates—are described in
Table 16.2.
Franchise businesses such as Subway, Jiffy-Lube, Holiday Inn, Supercuts, and 7-Eleven account
for more than $1 trillion of annual U.S. sales and roughly 40 percent of all retail transactions. One of
every 12 U.S. retail businesses is a franchise establishment; these firms employ 1 in every 16 workers
in the country.4
In a franchising system, individual franchisees are a tightly knit group of enterprises whose systematic operations are planned, directed, and controlled by the operation’s innovator, called a
franchisor. Franchises are distinguished by three characteristics:
1.
2.

3.

The franchisor owns a trade or service mark and licenses it to franchisees in return for royalty
payments.
The franchisee pays for the right to be part of the system. Start-up costs include rental and
lease equipment and fixtures, and usually a regular license fee. McDonald’s franchisees may invest as much as $1.6 million in total start-up costs and fees. The franchisee then pays
McDonald’s a certain percentage of sales plus a monthly rent.
The franchisor provides its franchisees with a system for doing business. McDonald’s requires
franchisees to attend “Hamburger University” in Oak Brook, Illinois, for two weeks to learn
how to manage the business. Franchisees must follow certain procedures in buying materials.

Franchising benefits both franchisor and franchisee. Franchisors gain the motivation
and hard work of employees who are entrepreneurs rather than “hired hands,” the franchisees’
familiarity with local communities and conditions, and the enormous purchasing power of
being a franchisor. Franchisees benefit from buying into a business with a well-known and
accepted brand name. They find it easier to borrow money for their business from financial
institutions, and they receive support in areas ranging from marketing and advertising to site
selection and staffing.
Franchisees do walk a fine line between independence and loyalty to the franchisor. Some franchisors are giving their franchisees freedom to run their own operations, from personalizing store
names to adjusting offerings and price. Beef ‘O’ Brady’s sports pub franchisees are allowed to set
prices to reflect their local markets. Great Harvest Bread believes in a “freedom franchise” approach
that encourages its franchisee bakers to create new items for their store menus and to share with
other franchisees if they are successful.5

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

451

As part of their franchise
agreement, new McDonald’s
franchisors must attend the
company’s Hamburger University
for two weeks to learn how to
properly manage their restaurants.

The New Retail Environment
With the onset of the recession in 2008, many retailers had to fundamentally reassess virtually
everything they did. Some adopted a cautious, defensive response, cutting stock levels, slowing expansion, and discounting deeply. Others were more creative about managing inventory, adjusting
product lines, and carefully avoiding overpromoting. For example, JCPenney held back 60 percent
of inventory for the fall 2009 holiday season, compared to its usual 20 percent, to avoid having
empty shelves and stock-outs on one hand and overflowing shelves and heavy discounting on the
other hand. Some firms, such as the Container Store and Saks, lowered average prices; others, such
as Gilt.com and Neiman Marcus, introduced selective and very short-term deep discounts.
Restoration Hardware chose to move its furniture product lines more upscale.6
Although many of these short-term adjustments were likely to remain longer-term, a number of
other long-term trends are also evident in the retail marketing environment. Here are some that
are changing the way consumers buy and manufacturers and retailers compete (see
Table 16.3
for a summary).
•

New Retail Forms and Combinations. To better satisfy customers’ need for convenience, a
variety of new retail forms have emerged. Bookstores feature coffee shops. Gas stations include food stores. Loblaw’s Supermarkets have fitness clubs. Shopping malls and bus and
train stations have peddlers’ carts in their aisles. Retailers are also experimenting with limited-time “pop-up” stores that let them promote brands to seasonal shoppers for a few weeks

TABLE 16.3
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Recent Retail Developments

New Retail Forms and Combinations
Growth of Intertype Competition
Competition between Store-Based and Nonstore-Based Retailing
Growth of Giant Retailers
Decline of Middle-Market Retailers
Growing Investment in Technology
Global Profile of Major Retailers
Growth of Shopper Marketing

452

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

•

•

•

•

•

in busy areas and create buzz. For the 2009 holiday season, Toys “R” Us set up 350 temporary
stores and toy boutiques, in many cases taking over vacant retail space in shopping centers
and malls.7
Growth of Intertype Competition. Department stores can’t worry just about other department stores—discount chains such as Walmart and Tesco are expanding into product areas
such as clothing, health, beauty, and electrical appliances. Different types of stores—discount
stores, catalog showrooms, department stores—all compete for the same consumers by carrying the same type of merchandise.
Competition between Store-Based and Nonstore-Based Retailing. Consumers now receive
sales offers through direct-mail letters and catalogs, television, cell phones, and the Internet.
The nonstore-based retailers making these offers are taking business away from store-based
retailers. Store-based retailers have responded by increasing their Web presence and finding
different ways to sell online, including through their own Web sites, as well as creating more
involving and engaging experiences in their stores. Store-based retailers want their stores to be
destinations where consumers enjoy rich experiences that captivate all their senses.
Sophisticated lighting, use of appropriate scents, and inviting, intimate designs are all being
increasingly employed.8
Growth of Giant Retailers. Through their superior information systems, logistical systems,
and buying power, giant retailers such as Walmart are able to deliver good service and immense volumes of product to masses of consumers at appealing prices. They are crowding out
smaller manufacturers that cannot deliver enough quantity and often dictate to the most powerful manufacturers what to make, how to price and promote, when and how to ship, and even
how to improve production and management. Manufacturers need these accounts; otherwise
they would lose 10 percent to 30 percent of the market. Some giant retailers are category killers
that concentrate on one product category, such as pet food (PETCO), home improvement
(Home Depot), or office supplies (Staples). Others are supercenters that combine grocery items
with a huge selection of nonfood merchandise (Walmart).
Decline of Middle-Market Retailers. We can characterize the retail market today as hourglass
or dog-bone shaped: Growth seems to be centered at the top (with luxury offerings from retailers such as Nordstrom and Neiman Marcus) and at the bottom (with discount pricing
from retailers such as Target and Walmart). As discount retailers improve their quality and image, consumers have been willing to trade down. Target offers Proenza Schouler designs and
Kmart sells an extensive line of Joe Boxer underwear and sleepwear. At the other end of the
spectrum, Coach recently converted 40 of its nearly 300 stores to a more upscale format that
offers higher-priced bags and concierge services. Opportunities are scarcer in the middle
where one-time successful retailers such as Sears, CompUSA, and Montgomery Ward have
struggled or even gone out of business.9
Kohl’s has found some success going after middle-market consumers by bringing in trendy
names such as Lauren Conrad, Vera Wang, Daisy Fuentes, and Tony Hawk. In addition to offering more up-market merchandise, Kohl’s also adapted the stores themselves to make the
shopping experience more convenient and pleasant.10 Marks & Spencer in the United
Kingdom features in-house brands and has built a strong retail brand image. Although these
stores tend to have high operating costs, they command high margins if their in-house brands
are both fashionable and popular.11
Growing Investment in Technology. Almost all retailers now use technology to produce better
forecasts, control inventory costs, and order electronically from suppliers. Technology is also affecting what happens inside the store. In-store programming on plasma TVs can run continual
demonstrations or promotional messages. After encountering problems measuring store traffic
up and down aisles—GPS on shopping carts didn’t work because consumers tended to abandon their carts at times during trips and thermal imaging couldn’t tell the difference between
turkeys and babies during tests—bidirectional infrared sensors sitting on store shelves have
been successfully introduced. Electronic shelf labeling allows retailers to change price levels
instantaneously at any time of the day or week. Retailers are also introducing features to help
customers as they shop. Some supermarkets are employing “smart” shopping carts or mobile
phones that help customers locate items in the store, find out about sales and special offers, and
pay for items more easily. As exciting as these new technologies are, their cost and unproven
effectiveness in many cases can create significant drawbacks.12

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

•

•

| CHAPTER 16

453

Global Profile of Major Retailers. Retailers with unique formats and
strong brand positioning are increasingly appearing in other countries. U.S.
retailers such as The Limited and the Gap have become globally prominent.
Walmart operates over 3,600 stores abroad where it does 25 percent of its
business. Dutch retailer Ahold and Belgian retailer Delhaize earn almost
two-thirds and four-fifths of their sales, respectively, in nondomestic markets. Among foreign-based global retailers in the United States are Italy’s
Benetton, Sweden’s IKEA home furnishings stores, and Japan’s UNIQLO
casual apparel retailer and Yaohan supermarkets.
Growth of Shopper Marketing. Buoyed by research suggesting that as
much as 70 percent to 80 percent of purchase decisions are made inside
the retail store, firms are increasingly recognizing the importance of influencing consumers at the point of purchase.13 Where and how a product is
displayed and sold can have a significant effect on sales.14 More communication options are available through in-store advertising such as Walmart
TV.15 Some employ goggle-like devices that record what test customers see
by projecting an infrared beam onto the wearer’s retina. One finding was
that many shoppers ignored products at eye level—the optimum location
was between waist and chest level.16

Marketing Decisions
With this new retail environment as a backdrop, we will examine retailers’ marketing decisions in the areas of target market, channels, product assortment,
procurement, prices, services and store atmosphere, store activities and experiences, communications, and location. We discuss the important topic of private
labels for retailers in the next section.

Whole Foods
Market

TARGET MARKET Until it defines and profiles the target market, the retailer cannot make
consistent decisions about product assortment, store decor, advertising messages and media, price,
and service levels. Ann Taylor has used a panel of 3,000 customers to provide feedback on its
merchandise and even its marketing campaign. The firm also solicits employees’ input.17 Whole
Foods has found success by offering a unique shopping experience to a customer base interested in
organic and natural foods.

Whole Foods Market

In 284 stores in North America and the United
Kingdom, Whole Foods creates celebrations of food. The markets are bright and well staffed,
and food displays are bountiful and seductive. Whole Foods is the largest organic and natural
foods grocer in the country, offering more than 2,400 items in four lines of private-label products that add up to 11 percent of sales: the premium Whole Foods Market, Whole Kitchen, and
Whole Market lines and the low-priced 365 Everyday Value line. Whole Foods also offers lots of information about its food. If you want to know, for instance, whether the chicken in the display case lived a happy,
free-roaming life, you can get a 16-page booklet and an invitation to visit the farm in Pennsylvania where
it was raised. If you can’t find the information you need, you have only to ask a well-trained and knowledgeable employee. Whole Foods’ approach is working, especially for consumers who view organic and
artisanal food as an affordable luxury. From 1991–2009, sales grew at a 28 percent compounded annual
growth rate (CAGR).18

Mistakes in choosing or switching target markets can be costly. When historically massmarket jeweler Zales decided to chase upscale customers, it replaced one-third of its merchandise, dropping inexpensive, low-quality diamond jewelry for high-margin, fashionable 14-karat
gold and silver pieces and shifting its ad campaign in the process. The move was a disaster.
Zales lost many of its traditional customers without winning over the new customers it had
hoped to attract.19

High-tech shopping carts allow
customers to keep track of their
total expenditures, search for
products, find out what is on
sale, and even pay without
waiting in line.

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

To better hit their targets, retailers are slicing the market into ever-finer segments and introducing new lines of stores to exploit niche markets with more relevant offerings: Gymboree launched
Janie and Jack, selling apparel and gifts for babies and toddlers; Hot Topic introduced Torrid, selling
fashions for plus-sized teen girls; and Limited Brand’s Tween Brands sells lower-priced fashion to
tween girls.

Channels
Based on a target market analysis and other considerations we reviewed in Chapter 15, retailers
must decide which channels to employ to reach their customers. Increasingly, the answer is multiple channels. Staples sells through its traditional retail channel, a direct-response Internet site, virtual malls, and thousands of links on affiliated sites.
As Chapter 15 explained, channels should be designed to work together effectively. Centuryold department store chain JCPenney has ensured that its Internet, store, and catalog businesses
are fully intertwined. It sells a vast variety of goods online; has made Internet access available
at its 35,000 checkout registers; and allows online shoppers to pick up and return orders at
stores and check which clothes are in stock there. These strategies—as well as the introduction
of a.n.a., a stylish line of women’s clothing—have helped give JCPenney a younger, more upscale image.20
Although some experts predicted otherwise, catalogs have actually grown in an Internet world
as more firms use them as branding devices. Victoria’s Secret’s integrated multichannel approach of
retail stores, catalog, and Internet has played a key role in its brand development.

Victoria’s
Secret

454

Victoria’s Secret Limited Brands founder Leslie Wexner felt U.S. women

would relish the opportunity to have a European-style lingerie shopping experience. “Women
need underwear, but women want lingerie,” he observed. Wexner’s assumption proved correct: A little more than a decade after he bought the business in 1982, Victoria’s Secret’s
average customer was buying 8 to 10 bras per year, compared with the national average of
two. To enhance its upscale reputation and glamorous appeal, the brand is endorsed by high-profile supermodels in ads and fashion shows. To expand its accessibility and offer privacy, the company began to
sell directly to consumers. Victoria’s Secret used a comprehensive marketing strategy to connect its retail,
catalog, and Web sales. Wexner sought to make it: “stand [out] as an integrated world-class brand. Across
all channels—catalogue, stores, Internet—the same products are launched at the same time, in exactly
the same way, with the same quality, and same positioning.” Since 1985, Victoria’s Secret has delivered
25 percent annual sales growth, selling through its 1,000-plus stores, catalogs, and company Web site,
posting $5.6 billion in revenues in 2009. Victoria’s Secret ships 400 million catalogs a year, or 1.33 for
every U.S. citizen, and catalog and online orders account for nearly 28 percent of its overall revenue, growing at double the rate of sales from its stores.21

PRODUCT ASSORTMENT The retailer’s product assortment must match the target market’s
shopping expectations in breadth and depth. A restaurant can offer a narrow and shallow
assortment (small lunch counters), a narrow and deep assortment (delicatessen), a broad and
shallow assortment (cafeteria), or a broad and deep assortment (large restaurant).
Identifying the right product assortment can be especially challenging in fast-moving industries
such as technology or fashion. Urban Outfitters ran into trouble when it strayed from its “hip, but
not too hip” formula, moving to embrace new styles too quickly. Sales fell over 25 percent during
2006.22 On the other hand, active and casual apparel retailer Aéropostale has found success by carefully matching its product assortment to its young teen target market’s needs.

Aéropostale Aéropostale has chosen to embrace a key reality of its target market:
11- to 18-year-olds, especially those on the young end, often want to look like other teens. So
while Abercrombie and American Eagle might reduce the number of cargo pants on the sales floor,
Aéropostale will keep an ample supply on hand at an affordable price. Staying on top of the right

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

455

trends isn’t easy, but Aéropostale is among the most diligent of teen retailers when it comes to
consumer research. In addition to running high school focus groups and in-store product tests,
the company launched an Internet-based program that seeks online shoppers’ input in creating new styles. It targets 10,000 of its best customers and averages 3,500 participants in each
of 20 tests a year. Aéropostale has gone from being a lackluster performer with only 100 stores
to a powerhouse with 914 total stores in the United States, Puerto Rico, and Canada. Net sales
were up 19 percent in 2008 to $1.9 billion, and net sales from e-commerce business increased 85 percent to $79 million.23
The real challenge begins after defining the store’s product assortment, and that is
to develop a product-differentiation strategy. To better differentiate themselves and
generate consumer interest, some luxury retailers are making their stores and merchandise more varied. Chanel has expanded its “ultralux” goods, including $26,000
alligator bags, while ensuring an ample supply of “must-haves” that are consistently
strong sellers.24 Here are some other possibilities:
•

•

•
•

•
•
•

Feature exclusive national brands that are not available at competing
retailers. Saks might get exclusive rights to carry the dresses of a well-known
international designer.
Feature mostly private-label merchandise. Benetton and Gap design most of
the clothes carried in their stores. Many supermarket and drug chains carry private-label merchandise.
Feature blockbuster distinctive merchandise events. Bloomingdale’s ran a
month-long celebration for the Barbie doll’s 50th anniversary in March 2009.
Feature surprise or ever-changing merchandise. Off-price apparel retailer TJ Maxx offers
surprise assortments of distress merchandise (goods the owner must sell immediately because
it needs cash), overstocks, and closeouts, totaling 10,000 new items each week at prices 20 percent to 60 percent below department and specialty store regular prices.
Feature the latest or newest merchandise first. Zara excels in and profits from being first-tomarket with appealing new looks and designs.
Offer merchandise-customizing services. Harrods of London will make custom-tailored
suits, shirts, and ties for customers, in addition to ready-made menswear.
Offer a highly targeted assortment. Lane Bryant carries goods for the larger woman. Brookstone
offers unusual tools and gadgets for the person who wants to shop in a “toy store for grown-ups.”

Merchandise may vary by geographical market. Electronics superstore Best Buy reviewed each of its
25,000 SKUs to adjust its merchandise according to income level and buying habits of shoppers. It also
puts different store formats and staffs in different areas—a location with computer sophisticates gets a
different store treatment than one with less technically sophisticated shoppers.25 Macy’s and Ross Stores
employ micro-merchandising and let managers select a significant percentage of store assortments.26

PROCUREMENT After deciding on the product-assortment strategy, the retailer must establish
merchandise sources, policies, and practices. In the corporate headquarters of a supermarket chain,
specialist buyers (sometimes called merchandise managers) are responsible for developing brand
assortments and listening to salespersons’ presentations.
Retailers are rapidly improving their skills in demand forecasting, merchandise selection, stock
control, space allocation, and display. They use computers to track inventory, compute economic
order quantities, order goods, and analyze dollars spent on vendors and products. Supermarket
chains use scanner data to manage their merchandise mix on a store-by-store basis.
Some stores are experimenting with radio frequency identification (RFID) systems made up of
“smart” tags—microchips attached to tiny radio antennas—and electronic readers. The smart tags
can be embedded on products or stuck on labels, and when the tag is near a reader, it transmits a
unique identifying number to its computer database. The use of RFIDs has been steadily increasing. Coca-Cola and Gillette use them to monitor inventory and track goods in real time as they
move from factories to supermarkets to shopping baskets.27
When retailers do study the economics of buying and selling individual products, they typically
find that a third of their square footage is tied up in products that don’t make an economic profit

Aéropostale’s “Teens for Jeans”
cause marketing campaign encourages its customers to donate used
jeans for homeless teens in North
America.

456

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Trader Joe’s

for them (profit above the cost of capital). Another third is typically allocated to product categories
that break even. The final third of the space creates the vast majority of the economic profit, yet
many retailers are unaware which third of their products generate it.28
Stores are using direct product profitability (DPP) to measure a product’s handling costs (receiving, moving to storage, paperwork, selecting, checking, loading, and space cost) from the time
it reaches the warehouse until a customer buys it in the retail store. They learn to their surprise that
the gross margin on a product often bears little relation to the direct product profit. Some highvolume products may have such high handling costs that they are less profitable and deserve less
shelf space than low-volume products.
Trader Joe’s has differentiated itself on its innovative procurement strategy.

Trader Joe’s

Los Angeles–based Trader Joe’s has carved out a special niche as
a “gourmet food outlet discount warehouse hybrid,” selling a constantly rotating assortment of
upscale specialty food and wine at lower-than-average prices. Roughly 80 percent of what it
stocks sells under private labels (compared to only 16 percent at most supermarkets), many
with a strong environmentally friendly message. For procurement, Trader Joe’s has adopted a
“less is more” philosophy. Every store carries about 3,000 products, compared to 55,000 at a conventional
supermarket, and only what it can buy and sell at a good price, even if that means changing stock weekly.
Its 18 expert buyers go directly to hundreds of suppliers, not to intermediaries, and 20 percent to 25 percent
of its suppliers are overseas. With thousands of vendor relationships all around the world, Trader Joe’s has
a success formula that’s difficult to copy. In addition, a product finds a space on the shelf only if it’s approved
by a tasting panel; there is one on each coast to satisfy regional tastes. The company introduces as many as
20 products a week to replace unpopular items.29

PRICES Prices are a key positioning factor and must be set in relationship to the target market,
product-and-service assortment mix, and competition.30 All retailers would like high turns × earns
(high volumes and high gross margins), but the two don’t usually go together. Most retailers fall into
the high-markup, lower-volume group (fine specialty stores) or the low-markup, higher-volume group
(mass merchandisers and discount stores). Within each of these groups are further gradations. Bijan on
Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills prices suits starting at $1,000 and shoes at $400. At the other end, Target
has skillfully combined a hip image with discount prices to offer customers a strong value proposition.

As part of its “cheap chic” retail
strategy, Target sells products from
famous designers, such as the
Harlem Design Series from New
York fashion visionary Stephen
Burrows.

Target

In the mid-1980s, Kmart was the dominant mass retailer, and Walmart was
growing rapidly. Sensing a gap in the market for “cheap chic” retail, Target strove to set itself
apart from the other big-box retailers by enhancing the design quality of its product selection, focusing on merchandise that was contemporary and unique. The company’s team of merchandisers traveled the world looking for the next hot items and trends to bring to the shelves. Target also
differentiated its merchandising layout, using low shelves, halogen and
track lighting, and wider aisles and avoiding “visual clutter” in stores. With
the slogan “Expect More, Pay Less,” Target seeks to build an up-market cachet for its brand without losing price-conscious consumers. It introduced a
line of products from world-renowned designers such as Michael Graves,
Isaac Mizrahi, Mossimo Giannulli, and Liz Lange and has kept innovating
with its merchandising model. In 2006, it introduced U.S. consumers to the
concept of “fast fashion,” already popular in Europe, to help keep the product selection fresh, which in turn led to more frequent shopper visits.31
Most retailers will put low prices on some items to serve as traffic
builders or loss leaders or to signal their pricing policies.32 They will
run storewide sales. They will plan markdowns on slower-moving merchandise. Shoe retailers, for example, expect to sell 50 percent of their
shoes at the normal markup, 25 percent at a 40 percent markup, and
the remaining 25 percent at cost.

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

457

As Chapter 14 noted, some retailers such as Walmart have abandoned “sales pricing” in favor of
everyday low pricing (EDLP). EDLP can lead to lower advertising costs, greater pricing stability, a
stronger image of fairness and reliability, and higher retail profits. Supermarket chains practicing
everyday low pricing can be more profitable than those practicing high–low sale pricing, but only
in certain circumstances.33

SERVICES Retailers must decide on the services mix to offer customers:
•
•
•

Prepurchase services include accepting telephone and mail orders, advertising, window and
interior display, fitting rooms, shopping hours, fashion shows, and trade-ins.
Postpurchase services include shipping and delivery, gift wrapping, adjustments and returns,
alterations and tailoring, installations, and engraving.
Ancillary services include general information, check cashing, parking, restaurants, repairs,
interior decorating, credit, rest rooms, and baby-attendant service.

Another differentiator is unerringly reliable customer service, whether face-to-face, across phone
lines, or via online chat. Barnes & Noble hires clean-cut people with a passion for customer service
and a general love of books; Borders employees are more likely to be tattooed or have multiple body
piercings. The company prides itself on the diversity of its employees and hires people who radiate
excitement about particular books and music, rather than simply finding a book for a customer.34
Whatever retailers do to enhance customer service, they must keep women in mind.
Approximately 85 percent of everything sold in the United States is bought or influenced by a
woman, and women are fed up with the decline in customer service. They are finding every possible
way to get around the system, from ordering online to resisting fake sales to just doing without.35
And when they do shop, they want well-organized layouts, helpful staff, and speedy checkouts.36

STORE ATMOSPHERE Atmosphere is another element in the store arsenal. Every store has a
look, and a physical layout that makes it hard or easy to move around (see “Marketing Memo:
Helping Stores to Sell”). Kohl’s floor plan is modeled after a racetrack loop and is designed to
convey customers smoothly past all the merchandise in the store. It includes a middle aisle that
hurried shoppers can use as a shortcut and yields higher spending levels than many competitors.37
Retailers must consider all the senses in shaping the customer’s experience. Varying the tempo of
music affects average time and dollars spent in the supermarket. Sony Style stores are seasoned with
a subtle vanilla and mandarin orange fragrance, and every surface, from countertops to paneling, is
designed to be touchable. Bloomingdale’s uses different essences in different departments: baby
powder in the baby store; suntan lotion in the bathing suit area; lilacs
in lingerie; and cinnamon and pine scent during the holiday season.38

STORE ACTIVITIES AND EXPERIENCES The growth of
e-commerce has forced traditional brick-and-mortar retailers to
respond. In addition to their natural advantages, such as products
that shoppers can actually see, touch, and test; real-life customer
service; and no delivery lag time for most purchases, stores also
provide a shopping experience as a strong differentiator.39
The store atmosphere should match shoppers’ basic motivations —
if customers are likely to be in a task-oriented and functional mindset, then a simpler, more restrained in-store environment may be
better.40 On the other hand, some retailers of experiential products
are creating in-store entertainment to attract customers who want
fun and excitement.41 REI, seller of outdoor gear and clothing
products, allows consumers to test climbing equipment on 25-foot or
even 65-foot walls in the store and to try GORE-TEX raincoats under
a simulated rain shower. Bass Pro Shops, a retailer of outdoor sports
equipment, features giant aquariums, waterfalls, trout ponds, archery
and rifle ranges, fly-tying demonstrations and some with an outdoor
pond to test equipment, indoor driving range and putting greens, and
classes in everything from ice fishing to conservation—all free.
Its first and largest showroom in Missouri is the number one tourist
destination in the state.

Bass Pro Shops sells its outdoor
sports equipment in an experiential retail environment conducive
to product demos and tests.

458

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

marketing
Helping Stores to Sell

Memo

In pursuit of higher sales volume, retailers are studying their store environments for ways to improve the shopper experience. Paco Underhill is managing director of the retail consultant Envirosell, whose clients include
McDonald’s, Starbucks, Estée Lauder, Blockbuster, Citibank, Gap, Burger
King, CVS, and Wells Fargo. Using a combination of in-store video recording
and observation, Underhill and his colleagues study 50,000 people each
year as they shop. He offers the following advice for fine-tuning retail space:

• Attract shoppers and keep them in the store. The amount of time
shoppers spend in a store is perhaps the single most important factor
in determining how much they buy. To increase shopping time, give
shoppers a sense of community; recognize them in some way; give
them ways to deal with their accessories, such as chairs in convenient
locations for boyfriends, husbands, children, or bags; and make the
environment both familiar and fresh each time they come in.

• Honor the “transition zone.” On entering a store, people need to slow
down and sort out the stimuli, which means they will likely be moving too
fast to respond positively to signs, merchandise, or sales clerks in the
zone they cross before making that transition. Make sure there are clear
sight lines. Create a focal point for information within the store. Most
right-handed people turn right upon entering a store.

• Avoid overdesign. Store fixtures, point-of-sales information, packaging,
signage, and flat-screen televisions can combine to create a visual cacophony. Use crisp and clear signage—“Our Best Seller” or “Our Best Student
Computer”—where people feel comfortable stopping and facing the right
way.Window signs, displays, and mannequins communicate best when angled 10 to 15 degrees to face the direction that people are moving.

• Don’t make them hunt. Put the most popular products up front to
reward busy shoppers and encourage leisurely shoppers to look more.
At Staples, ink cartridges are one of the first products shoppers
encounter after entering.

• Make merchandise available to the reach and touch. It is hard to
overemphasize the importance of customers’ hands. A store can offer
the finest, cheapest, sexiest goods, but if the shopper cannot reach or
pick them up, much of their appeal can be lost.

• Make kids welcome. If kids feel welcome, parents will follow. Take a
three-year-old’s perspective and make sure there are engaging sights at
eye level. A virtual hopscotch pattern or dinosaur on the floor can turn a
boring shopping trip for a child into a friendly experience.

• Note that men do not ask questions. Men always move faster than
women do through a store’s aisles. In many settings, it is hard to get
them to look at anything they had not intended to buy. Men also do not
like asking where things are. If a man cannot find the section he is looking for, he will wheel about once or twice, then leave the store without
ever asking for help.

• Remember women need space. A shopper, especially a woman, is
far less likely to buy an item if her derriere is brushed, even lightly, by another customer when she is looking at a display. Keeping aisles wide and
clear is crucial.

• Make checkout easy. Be sure to have the right high-margin goods
near cash registers to satisfy impulse shoppers. People love to buy
candy when they check out—so satisfy their sweet tooth.

Sources: Paco Underhill, Call of the Mall: The Geography of Shopping (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004); Paco Underhill, Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1999). See also, Kenneth Hein, “Shopping Guru Sees Death of Detergent Aisle,” Brandweek, March 27, 2006, p. 11; Bob Parks, “5 Rules of Great Design,”
Business 2.0 (March 2003): 47–49; Russell Boniface, “I Spy a Shopper!” AIArchitect, June 2006; Susan Berfield, “Getting the Most Out of Every Shopper, BusinessWeek,
February 9, 2009, pp. 45–46; www.envirosell.com.

COMMUNICATIONS Retailers use a wide range of communication tools to generate traffic
and purchases. They place ads, run special sales, issue money-saving coupons, and run frequentshopper-reward programs, in-store food sampling, and coupons on shelves or at checkout points.
They work with manufacturers to design point-of-sale materials that reflect both their images.42
Upscale retailers place tasteful, full-page ads in magazines such as Vogue, Vanity Fair, or Esquire
and carefully train salespeople to greet customers, interpret their needs, and handle complaints.
Off-price retailers will arrange their merchandise to promote bargains and savings, while
conserving on service and sales assistance. Retailers are also using interactive and social media to
pass on information and create communities around their brands.43 Casual dining chain
Houlihan’s created a social network site, HQ, to gain honest, immediate feedback from 10,500
invitation-only “Houlifan” customers in return for insider information.
LOCATION The three keys to retail success are often said to be “location, location, and
location.” Department store chains, oil companies, and fast-food franchisers exercise great care in
selecting regions of the country in which to open outlets, then particular cities, and then particular
sites. Retailers can place their stores in the following locations:
•

Central business districts. The oldest and most heavily trafficked city areas, often known as
“downtown”

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

•

Regional shopping centers. Large suburban malls containing 40 to 200 stores, typically featuring one or two nationally known anchor stores, such as Macy’s or Lord & Taylor or a combination of big-box stores such as PETCO, Payless Shoes, Borders, or Bed Bath & Beyond, and
a great number of smaller stores, many under franchise operation44
Community shopping centers. Smaller malls with one anchor store and 20 to 40 smaller stores
Shopping strips. A cluster of stores, usually in one long building, serving a neighborhood’s
needs for groceries, hardware, laundry, shoe repair, and dry cleaning
A location within a larger store. Certain well-known retailers—McDonald’s, Starbucks,
Nathan’s, Dunkin’ Donuts—locate new, smaller units as concession space within larger stores
or operations, such as airports, schools, or department stores.
Stand-alone stores. Some retailers such as Kohl’s and JCPenney are avoiding malls and shopping centers to locate new stores in free-standing sites on streets, so they are not connected
directly to other retail stores.

•
•
•

•

In view of the relationship between high traffic and high rents, retailers must decide on the most
advantageous locations for their outlets, using traffic counts, surveys of consumer shopping habits,
and analysis of competitive locations.

Private Labels
A private label brand (also called a reseller, store, house, or distributor brand) is a brand that
retailers and wholesalers develop. Benetton, The Body Shop, and Marks & Spencer carry mostly
own-brand merchandise. In grocery stores in Europe and Canada, store brands account for as
much as 40 percent of the items sold. In Britain, the largest food chains, roughly half of what
Sainsbury and Tesco sell is store-label goods.
For many manufacturers, retailers are both collaborators and competitors. According to the
Private Label Manufacturers’ Association, store brands now account for one of every four items
sold in U.S. supermarkets, drug chains, and mass merchandisers, up from 19 percent in 1999. In
one study, seven of ten shoppers believed the private label products they bought were as good as, if
not better than, their national brand. Setting aside beverages, private labels account for roughly 30
percent of all food served in U.S. homes, and virtually every household purchases private label
brands from time to time.45
Private labels are rapidly gaining ascendance in a way that has many manufacturers of name
brands running scared. Some experts believe though that 50 percent is the natural limit for volume
of private labels to carry because (1) consumers prefer certain national brands, and (2) many product categories are not feasible or attractive on a private-label basis.46
Table 16.4 displays the
product categories that have the highest private-label sales.

TABLE 16.4

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Top 10 Private Label Categories–2009
(billions of dollars)

Milk ($8.1)
Bread & Baked Good ($4.2)
Cheese ($3.5)
Medications/Remedies/Vitamins ($3.4)
Paper Products ($2.6)
Eggs—Fresh ($1.9)
Fresh Produce ($1.5)
Packaged Meat ($1.5)
Pet Food ($1.5)
Unprepared Meat/Frozen Seafood ($1.4)

Source: Data from www.privatelabelmag.com. December 9, 2010. Used with permission.

| CHAPTER 16

459

460

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Role of Private Labels
Why do intermediaries sponsor their own brands?47 First, these brands can be more profitable.
Intermediaries search for manufacturers with excess capacity that will produce private label goods
at low cost. Other costs, such as research and development, advertising, sales promotion, and physical distribution, are also much lower, so private labels can generate a higher profit margin.
Retailers also develop exclusive store brands to differentiate themselves from competitors. Many
price-sensitive consumers prefer store brands in certain categories. These preferences give retailers
increased bargaining power with marketers of national brands.
Private label or store brands should be distinguished from generics. Generics are unbranded,
plainly packaged, less expensive versions of common products such as spaghetti, paper towels, and
canned peaches. They offer standard or lower quality at a price that may be as much as 20 percent
to 40 percent lower than nationally advertised brands and 10 percent to 20 percent lower than the
retailer’s private-label brands. The lower price is made possible by lower-cost labeling and packaging and minimal advertising, and sometimes lower-quality ingredients. Generics can be found in a
wide range of different products, even medicines.

Generic Drugs

Generic drugs have become big business. Branded drug sales
actually declined for the first time in 2009. By making knockoffs faster and in larger quantities,
Israel’s Teva has become the world’s biggest generic drugmaker, with revenue of $14 billion.
Pharma giant Novartis is one of the world’s top five makers of branded drugs, with such successes as Diovan for high blood pressure and Gleevec for cancer, but it has
also become the world’s second-largest maker of generic drugs following
its acquisition of Sandoz, HEXAL, Eon Labs, and others. Other pharmaceutical companies such as Sanofi-Aventis and GlaxoSmithKline have entered
the generic drug market not in the United States but in emerging markets
in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Asia, where some consumers cannot
afford expensive brand-name drugs but worry about counterfeit or
low-quality drugs. These consumers are willing to pay at least a small premium for a drug backed by a trusted company.48

Private-Label Success Factors

Loblaw

Generic drugs have become big
business as a means to lower
health care costs.

In the confrontation between manufacturers’ and private labels, retailers have many advantages and increasing market power.49 Because shelf
space is scarce, many supermarkets charge a slotting fee for accepting a new brand, to cover the cost of
listing and stocking it. Retailers also charge for special display space and in-store advertising space.
They typically give more prominent display to their own brands and make sure they are well stocked.
Retailers are building better quality into their store brands. Supermarket retailers are adding
premium store-brand items like organics or creating new products without direct competition,
such as three-minute microwaveable snack pizzas. They are also emphasizing attractive, innovative
packaging. Some are even advertising aggressively: Safeway ran a $100 million integrated communication program that featured TV and print ads, touting the store brand’s quality.50

Loblaw Since 1984, when its President’s Choice line of foods made its debut, the term

private label has brought Loblaw instantly to mind. Toronto-based Loblaw’s Decadent Chocolate
Chip Cookie quickly became a Canadian leader and showed how innovative store brands could
compete effectively with national brands by matching or even exceeding their quality. A finely tuned
brand strategy for its premium President’s Choice line and its no-frills, yellow-labeled No Name line
(which the company relaunched with a vengeance during the recent recession) has helped differentiate its stores
and built Loblaw into a powerhouse in Canada and the United States. The President’s Choice line of products has
become so successful that Loblaw is licensing it to noncompetitive retailers in other countries. In 2010, Loblaw
introduced a new tier of low-priced store brands, priced slightly above the No Name line, to be made available at
its chain of 175 No Frills “hard discount” grocery stores.51

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

Marketing Insight

•

Manufacturer’s Response
to the Private Label Threat
To maintain their marketplace power, leading brand marketers are investing significantly in R&D to bring out new brands, line extensions,
features, and quality improvements to stay a step ahead of the store
brands. They are also investing in strong “pull” advertising programs to
maintain high consumer brand recognition and preference and overcome the in-store marketing advantage that private labels can enjoy.
Top-brand marketers also are seeking to partner with major mass distributors in a joint search for logistical economies and competitive
strategies that produce savings for both sides. Cutting all unnecessary
costs allows national brands to command a price premium, although it
can’t exceed the value perceptions of consumers.
University of North Carolina’s Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp and
London Business School’s Nirmalya Kumar offer four strategic recommendations for manufacturers to compete against or collaborate with
private labels.
•
Fight selectively where manufacturers can win against private labels and add value for consumers, retailers, and shareholders. This
is typically where the brand is one or two in the category or occupying a premium niche position. Procter & Gamble rationalized its

•

•

| CHAPTER 16

461

portfolio, selling off various brands such as Sunny Delight juice
drink, Jif peanut butter, and Crisco shortening, in part so it could
concentrate on strengthening its 20+ brands with more than
$1 billion in sales.
Partner effectively by seeking win-win relationships with retailers
through strategies that complement the retailer’s private labels.
Estée Lauder created four brands (American Beauty, Flirt, Good
Skin, and Grassroots) exclusively for Kohl’s, to help the retailer
generate volume and protect its more prestigious brands in the
process. Manufacturers selling through hard discounters such as
Lidl and Aldi have increased sales by finding new customers who
have not previously bought the brand.
Innovate brilliantly with new products to help beat private labels.
Continuously launching incremental new products keeps the
manufacturer brands looking fresh, but the firm must also periodically
launch radical new products and protect the intellectual property of all
brands. Kraft doubled its number of patent lawyers to make sure its
innovations were legally protected as much as possible.
Create winning value propositions by imbuing brands with symbolic
imagery as well as functional quality that beats private labels. Too
many manufacturer brands have let private labels equal and sometimes better them on functional quality. In addition, to have a winning value proposition, marketers need to monitor pricing and
ensure that perceived benefits equal the price premium.

Sources: James A. Narus and James C. Anderson, “Contributing as a Distributor
to Partnerships with Manufacturers,” Business Horizons (September–October
1987); Nirmalya Kumar and Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, Private Label Strategy:
How to Meet the Store-Brand Challenge (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2007); Nirmalya Kumar, “The Right Way to Fight for Shelf Domination,” Advertising
Age, January 22, 2007; Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp and Nirmalya Kumar,
“Don’t Be Undersold, Harvard Business Review, December 2009, p. 91.

Although retailers get credit for the success of private labels, the growing power of store brands
has also benefited from the weakening of national brands. Many consumers have become more price
sensitive, a trend reinforced by the continuous barrage of coupons and price specials that has trained
a generation to buy on price. Competing manufacturers and national retailers copy and duplicate
the quality and features of the best brands in a category, reducing physical product differentiation.
Moreover, by cutting marketing communication budgets, some firms have made it harder to create
any intangible differences in brand image. A steady stream of brand extensions and line extensions
has blurred brand identity at times and led to a confusing amount of product proliferation.
Bucking these trends, many manufacturers or national brands are fighting back. “Marketing
Insight: Manufacturer’s Respond to the Private Label Threat,” describes the strategies and tactics
being taken to compete more effectively with private labels.

Wholesaling
Wholesaling includes all the activities in selling goods or services to those who buy for resale or
business use. It excludes manufacturers and farmers because they are engaged primarily in production, and it excludes retailers. The major types of wholesalers are described in
Table 16.5.
Wholesalers (also called distributors) differ from retailers in a number of ways. First, wholesalers
pay less attention to promotion, atmosphere, and location because they are dealing with business
customers rather than final consumers. Second, wholesale transactions are usually larger than retail

462

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

TABLE 16.5

Major Wholesaler Types

Merchant wholesalers: Independently owned businesses that take title to the merchandise they
handle. They are full-service and limited-service jobbers, distributors, and mill supply houses.
Full-service wholesalers: Carry stock, maintain a sales force, offer credit, make deliveries, provide
management assistance. Wholesale merchants sell primarily to retailers: Some carry several merchandise lines, some carry one or two lines, others carry only part of a line. Industrial distributors sell to
manufacturers and also provide services such as credit and delivery.
Limited-service wholesalers: Cash and carry wholesalers sell a limited line of fast-moving goods to
small retailers for cash. Truck wholesalers sell and deliver a limited line of semiperishable goods to
supermarkets, grocery stores, hospitals, restaurants, hotels. Drop shippers serve bulk industries such
as coal, lumber, and heavy equipment. They assume title and risk from the time an order is accepted to
its delivery. Rack jobbers serve grocery retailers in nonfood items. Delivery people set up displays, price
goods, and keep inventory records; they retain title to goods and bill retailers only for goods sold to the
end of the year. Producers’ cooperatives assemble farm produce to sell in local markets. Mail-order
wholesalers send catalogs to retail, industrial, and institutional customers; orders are filled and sent by
mail, rail, plane, or truck.
Brokers and agents: Facilitate buying and selling, on commission of 2 percent to 6 percent of the
selling price; limited functions; generally specialize by product line or customer type. Brokers bring
buyers and sellers together and assist in negotiation; they are paid by the party hiring them—food brokers, real estate brokers, insurance brokers. Agents represent buyers or sellers on a more permanent
basis. Most manufacturers’ agents are small businesses with a few skilled salespeople: Selling agents
have contractual authority to sell a manufacturer’s entire output; purchasing agents make purchases
for buyers and often receive, inspect, warehouse, and ship merchandise; commission merchants take
physical possession of products and negotiate sales.
Manufacturers’ and retailers’ branches and offices: Wholesaling operations conducted by sellers
or buyers themselves rather than through independent wholesalers. Separate branches and offices are
dedicated to sales or purchasing. Many retailers set up purchasing offices in major market centers.
Specialized wholesalers: Agricultural assemblers (buy the agricultural output of many farms), petroleum bulk plants and terminals (consolidate the output of many wells), and auction companies (auction
cars, equipment, etc., to dealers and other businesses).

transactions, and wholesalers usually cover a larger trade area than retailers. Third, the government
deals with wholesalers and retailers differently in terms of legal regulations and taxes.
Why do manufacturers not sell directly to retailers or final consumers? Why are wholesalers
used at all? In general, wholesalers are more efficient in performing one or more of the following
functions:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Selling and promoting. Wholesalers’ sales forces help manufacturers reach many small business customers at a relatively low cost. They have more contacts, and buyers often trust them
more than they trust a distant manufacturer.
Buying and assortment building. Wholesalers are able to select items and build the assortments their customers need, saving them considerable work.
Bulk breaking. Wholesalers achieve savings for their customers by buying large carload lots
and breaking the bulk into smaller units.
Warehousing. Wholesalers hold inventories, thereby reducing inventory costs and risks to
suppliers and customers.
Transportation. Wholesalers can often provide quicker delivery to buyers because they are
closer to the buyers.
Financing. Wholesalers finance customers by granting credit, and finance suppliers by ordering early and paying bills on time.
Risk bearing. Wholesalers absorb some risk by taking title and bearing the cost of theft, damage, spoilage, and obsolescence.
Market information. Wholesalers supply information to suppliers and customers regarding
competitors’ activities, new products, price developments, and so on.

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

•

Management services and counseling. Wholesalers often help retailers improve their operations by training sales clerks, helping with store layouts and displays, and setting up accounting and inventory-control systems. They may help industrial customers by offering training
and technical services.

Trends in Wholesaling

Arrow
Electronics

Wholesaler-distributors have faced mounting pressures in recent years from new sources of competition, demanding customers, new technologies, and more direct-buying programs by large
industrial, institutional, and retail buyers. Manufacturers’ major complaints against wholesalers
are: They don’t aggressively promote the manufacturer’s product line and they act more like order
takers; they don’t carry enough inventory and therefore don’t fill customers’ orders fast enough;
they don’t supply the manufacturer with up-to-date market, customer, and competitive information; they don’t attract high-caliber managers to bring down their own costs; and they charge too
much for their services.
Savvy wholesalers have rallied to the challenge and adapted their services to meet their suppliers’ and target customers’ changing needs. They recognize that they must add value to the channel.

Arrow Electronics Arrow Electronics is a global provider of products,

services, and solutions to the electronic component and computer product industries. It serves
as a supply channel partner for more than 900 suppliers and 125,000 original equipment
manufacturers, contract manufacturers, and commercial customers through a global network
of 310 locations in 51 countries and territories. With huge contract manufacturers buying
more parts directly from suppliers, distributors such as Arrow are being squeezed out. To better compete,
Arrow has embraced services, providing financing, on-site inventory management, parts-tracking
software, and chip programming. Services helped quadruple Arrow’s share price in five years, and the
company approached $15 billion in sales in 2009.52
Wholesalers have worked to increase asset productivity by managing inventories and receivables
better. They’re also reducing operating costs by investing in more advanced materials-handling technology, information systems, and the Internet. Finally, they’re improving their strategic decisions
about target markets, product assortment and services, price, communications, and distribution.
Narus and Anderson interviewed leading industrial distributors and identified four ways they
strengthened their relationships with manufacturers:
1.
2.
3.
4.

They sought a clear agreement with their manufacturers about their expected functions in the
marketing channel.
They gained insight into the manufacturers’ requirements by visiting their plants and attending manufacturer association conventions and trade shows.
They fulfilled their commitments to the manufacturer by meeting the volume targets, paying
bills promptly, and feeding back customer information to their manufacturers.
They identified and offered value-added services to help their suppliers.53

W.W. Grainger

The wholesaling industry remains vulnerable to one of the most enduring trends—fierce resistance to price increases and the winnowing out of suppliers based on cost and quality. The trend toward vertical integration, in which manufacturers try to control or own their intermediaries, is still
strong. One firm that succeeds in the wholesaling business is W.W. Grainger.

W.W. Grainger

W.W. Grainger is the leading supplier of facilities maintenance products that help 1.8 million businesses and institutions stay up and running. Sales for
2008 were $6.9 billion. Grainger serves customers through a network of over 600 branches
in North America and China, 18 distribution centers, numerous catalogs and direct-mail
pieces, and four Web sites to guarantee product availability and quick service. Its 4,000-pluspage catalog features 138,000 products, such as motors, lighting, material handlers, fasteners, tools, and

| CHAPTER 16

463

464

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

safety supplies, and customers can purchase over 300,000 products at Grainger.com. The distribution
centers are linked by satellite network, which has reduced customer-response time and boosted sales.
Helped by more than 3,000 suppliers, Grainger offers customers a total of more than 900,000 supplies
and repair parts in all.54

Market Logistics
Physical distribution starts at the factory. Managers choose a set of warehouses (stocking points)
and transportation carriers that will deliver the goods to final destinations in the desired time or
at the lowest total cost. Physical distribution has now been expanded into the broader concept of
supply chain management (SCM). Supply chain management starts before physical distribution
and means strategically procuring the right inputs (raw materials, components, and capital
equipment), converting them efficiently into finished products, and dispatching them to the final destinations. An even broader perspective looks at how the company’s suppliers themselves
obtain their inputs.
The supply chain perspective can help a company identify superior suppliers and distributors
and help them improve productivity and reduce costs. Consumer goods manufacturers admired
for their supply chain management include P&G, Kraft, General Mills, PepsiCo, and Nestlé; noteworthy retailers include Walmart, Target, Publix, Costco, Kroger, and Meijer.55
Firms are also striving to improve the environmental impact and sustainability of their supply
chain by shrinking their carbon footprint and using recyclable packaging. Johnson & Johnson
switched to Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)–certified paperboard for its BAND-AID brand
boxes. As one executive noted, “Johnson & Johnson and its operating companies are positioned to
make paper and packaging procurement decisions that could help influence responsible forest
management.”56
Market logistics includes planning the infrastructure to meet demand, then implementing and
controlling the physical flows of materials and final goods from points of origin to points of use, to
meet customer requirements at a profit. Market logistics planning has four steps:57
1.
2.

3.
4.

Deciding on the company’s value proposition to its customers. (What on-time delivery standard should we offer? What levels should we attain in ordering and billing accuracy?)
Selecting the best channel design and network strategy for reaching the customers. (Should
the company serve customers directly or through intermediaries? What products should we
source from which manufacturing facilities? How many warehouses should we maintain and
where should we locate them?)
Developing operational excellence in sales forecasting, warehouse management, transportation management, and materials management
Implementing the solution with the best information systems, equipment, policies, and procedures

Studying market logistics leads managers to find the most efficient way to deliver value. For example, a software company might traditionally produce and package software disks and manuals,
ship them to wholesalers, which ship them to retailers, which sell them to customers, who bring
them home to download onto their PCs. Market logistics offers two superior delivery systems. The
first lets the customer download the software directly onto his or her computer. The second allows
the computer manufacturer to download the software onto its products. Both solutions eliminate
the need for printing, packaging, shipping, and stocking millions of disks and manuals.

Integrated Logistics Systems
The market logistics task calls for integrated logistics systems (ILS), which include materials management, material flow systems, and physical distribution, aided by information technology (IT).
Information systems play a critical role in managing market logistics, especially via computers,
point-of-sale terminals, uniform product bar codes, satellite tracking, electronic data interchange
(EDI), and electronic funds transfer (EFT). These developments have shortened the order-cycle
time, reduced clerical labor, reduced errors, and provided improved control of operations. They
have enabled companies to promise “the product will be at dock 25 at 10:00 AM tomorrow,” and
deliver on that promise.

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

465

Market logistics encompass several activities. The first is sales forecasting, on the basis of which
the company schedules distribution, production, and inventory levels. Production plans indicate
the materials the purchasing department must order. These materials arrive through inbound
transportation, enter the receiving area, and are stored in raw-material inventory. Raw materials are
converted into finished goods. Finished-goods inventory is the link between customer orders and
manufacturing activity. Customers’ orders draw down the finished-goods inventory level, and
manufacturing activity builds it up. Finished goods flow off the assembly line and pass through
packaging, in-plant warehousing, shipping-room processing, outbound transportation, field warehousing, and customer delivery and servicing.
Management has become concerned about the total cost of market logistics, which can
amount to as much as 30 percent to 40 percent of the product’s cost. In the U.S. grocery business, waste or “shrink” affects 8 percent to 10 percent of perishable goods, costing $20 billion annually. To reduce shrink, grocery retailer Stop & Shop looked across its entire fresh-food supply
chain and reduced everything from the size of suppliers’ boxes to the number of products on
display. With these changes, the supermarket chain cut shrink by almost a third, saving over
$50 million and eliminating 36,000 pounds of rotten food, improving customer satisfaction at
the same time.58
Many experts call market logistics “the last frontier for cost economies,” and firms are determined to wring every unnecessary cost out of the system: In 1982, logistics represented 14.5 percent
of U.S. GDP; by 2007, the share had dropped to about 10 percent.59 Lower market-logistics costs
will permit lower prices, yield higher profit margins, or both. Even though the cost of market logistics can be high, a well-planned program can be a potent tool in competitive marketing.
Many firms are embracing lean manufacturing, originally pioneered by Japanese firms such as
Toyota, to produce goods with minimal waste of time, materials, and money. CONMED’s disposable devices are used by a hospital somewhere in the world every 90 seconds to insert and remove
fluid around joints during orthoscopic surgery,

ConMed

To streamline production, medical manufacturer ConMed set out to link
its operations as closely as possible to the ultimate buyer of its products. Rather than moving
manufacturing to China, which might have lowered labor costs
but could have also risked long lead times, inventory buildup,
and unanticipated delays, the firm put new production
processes into place to assemble its disposable products only after hospitals placed orders. Some 80 percent of orders were predictable enough
that demand forecasts updated every few months could set hourly production targets. As proof of the firm’s new efficiency, the assembly area for
fluid-injection devices went from covering 3,300 square feet and stocking
$93,000 worth of parts to 650 square feet and $6,000 worth of parts.
Output per worker increased 21 percent.60
Lean manufacturing must be implemented thoughtfully and monitored closely. Toyota’s recent crisis in product safety that resulted in
extensive product recalls has been attributed in part to the fact that
some aspects of the lean manufacturing approach—eliminating overlap by using common parts and
designs across multiple product lines, and reducing the number of suppliers to procure parts in
greater scale—can backfire when quality-control issues arise.61

Market-Logistics Objectives
Many companies state their market-logistics objective as “getting the right goods to the right places
at the right time for the least cost.” Unfortunately, this objective provides little practical guidance.
No system can simultaneously maximize customer service and minimize distribution cost.
Maximum customer service implies large inventories, premium transportation, and multiple warehouses, all of which raise market-logistics costs.

By redesigning its production
assembly, medical manufacturer
ConMed significantly increased
productivity.

466

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

Nor can a company achieve market-logistics efficiency by asking each market-logistics manager
to minimize his or her own logistics costs. Market-logistics costs interact and are often negatively
related. For example:
•

•
•

The traffic manager favors rail shipment over air shipment because rail costs less. However, because the railroads are slower, rail shipment ties up working capital longer, delays customer
payment, and might cause customers to buy from competitors who offer faster service.
The shipping department uses cheap containers to minimize shipping costs. Cheaper containers lead to a higher rate of damaged goods and customer ill will.
The inventory manager favors low inventories. This increases stock-outs, back orders, paperwork, special production runs, and high-cost, fast-freight shipments.

Given that market-logistics activities require strong trade-offs, managers must make decisions
on a total-system basis. The starting point is to study what customers require and what competitors
are offering. Customers are interested in on-time delivery, supplier willingness to meet emergency
needs, careful handling of merchandise, and supplier willingness to take back defective goods and
resupply them quickly.
The company must then research the relative importance of these service outputs. For example,
service-repair time is very important to buyers of copying equipment. Xerox developed a service
delivery standard that “can put a disabled machine anywhere in the continental United States back
into operation within three hours after receiving the service request.” It then designed a service
division of personnel, parts, and locations to deliver on this promise.
The company must also consider competitors’ service standards. It will normally want to match
or exceed the competitors’ service level, but the objective is to maximize profits, not sales. Some
companies offer less service and charge a lower price; other companies offer more service and
charge a premium price.
The company ultimately must establish some promise it makes to the market. Coca-Cola wants
to “put Coke within an arm’s length of desire.” Lands’ End, the giant clothing retailer, aims to
respond to every phone call within 20 seconds and to ship every order within 24 hours of receipt.
Some companies define standards for each service factor. One appliance manufacturer has established the following service standards: to deliver at least 95 percent of the dealer’s orders within seven
days of order receipt, to fill them with 99 percent accuracy, to answer dealer inquiries on order status
within three hours, and to ensure that merchandise damaged in transit does not exceed 1 percent.
Given the market-logistics objectives, the company must design a system that will minimize the
cost of achieving these objectives. Each possible market-logistics system will lead to the following cost:
M ⫽ T ⫹ FW ⫹ VW ⫹ S
where M = total market-logistics cost of proposed system

T ⫽ total freight cost of proposed system
FW ⫽ total fixed warehouse cost of proposed system
VW ⫽ total variable warehouse costs (including inventory) of proposed system
S ⫽ total cost of lost sales due to average delivery delay under proposed system
Choosing a market-logistics system calls for examining the total cost (M) associated with different proposed systems and selecting the system that minimizes it. If it is hard to measure S, the company should aim to minimize T ⫹ FW ⫹ VW for a target level of customer service.

Market-Logistics Decisions
The firm must make four major decisions about its market logistics: (1) How should we handle orders (order processing)? (2) Where should we locate our stock (warehousing)? (3) How much stock
should we hold (inventory)? and (4) How should we ship goods (transportation)?

ORDER PROCESSING Most companies today are trying to shorten the order-to-payment
cycle—that is, the elapsed time between an order’s receipt, delivery, and payment. This cycle has
many steps, including order transmission by the salesperson, order entry and customer credit
check, inventory and production scheduling, order and invoice shipment, and receipt of

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

467

payment. The longer this cycle takes, the lower the customer’s satisfaction and the lower the
company’s profits.

WAREHOUSING Every company must store finished goods until they are sold, because
production and consumption cycles rarely match. Consumer-packaged-goods companies have
been reducing their number of stocking locations from 10 to 15 to about 5 to 7, and
pharmaceutical and medical distributors have cut theirs from 90 to about 45. On the one hand,
more stocking locations mean goods can be delivered to customers more quickly, but warehousing
and inventory costs are higher. To reduce these costs, the company might centralize its inventory in
one place and use fast transportation to fill orders.
Some inventory is kept at or near the plant, and the rest in warehouses in other locations. The
company might own private warehouses and also rent space in public warehouses. Storage warehouses store goods for moderate to long periods of time. Distribution warehouses receive goods
from various company plants and suppliers and move them out as soon as possible. Automated
warehouses employ advanced materials-handling systems under the control of a central computer
and are increasingly becoming the norm.
Some warehouses are now taking on activities formerly done in the plant. These include assembly, packaging, and constructing promotional displays. Postponing finalization of the offering to
the warehouse can achieve savings in costs and finer matching of offerings to demand.
INVENTORY Salespeople would like their companies to carry enough stock to fill all customer
orders immediately. However, this is not cost-effective. Inventory cost increases at an accelerating
rate as the customer-service level approaches 100 percent. Management needs to know how much
sales and profits would increase as a result of carrying larger inventories and promising faster order
fulfillment times, and then make a decision.
As inventory draws down, management must know at what stock level to place a new order. This
stock level is called the order (or reorder) point. An order point of 20 means reordering when the
stock falls to 20 units. The order point should balance the risks of stock-out against the costs of
overstock. The other decision is how much to order. The larger the quantity ordered, the less frequently an order needs to be placed. The company needs to balance order-processing costs and
inventory-carrying costs. Order-processing costs for a manufacturer consist of setup costs and
running costs (operating costs when production is running) for the item. If setup costs are low, the
manufacturer can produce the item often, and the average cost per item is stable and equal to the
running costs. If setup costs are high, however, the manufacturer can reduce the average cost per
unit by producing a long run and carrying more inventory.
Order-processing costs must be compared with inventory-carrying costs. The larger the average
stock carried, the higher the inventory-carrying costs. These carrying costs include storage charges,
cost of capital, taxes and insurance, and depreciation and obsolescence. Carrying costs might run as
high as 30 percent of inventory value. This means that marketing managers who want their companies to carry larger inventories need to show that the larger inventories would produce incremental
gross profits to exceed incremental carrying costs.
We can determine the optimal order quantity by observing how order-processing costs and inventorycarrying costs sum up at different order levels.
Figure 16.1 shows that the order-processing

|Fig. 16.1|
Cost per Unit (dollars)

Total cost per unit
Inventory-carrying
cost per unit

Order-processing
cost per unit

Q*
Order Quantity

Determining Optimal
Order Quantity

468

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

cost per unit decreases with the number of units ordered because the order costs are spread over
more units. Inventory-carrying charges per unit increase with the number of units ordered, because each
unit remains longer in inventory. We sum the two cost curves vertically into a total-cost curve and project
the lowest point of the total-cost curve on the horizontal axis to find the optimal order quantity Q*.62
Companies are reducing their inventory costs by treating inventory items differently, positioning them according to risk and opportunity. They distinguish between bottleneck items (high risk,
low opportunity), critical items (high risk, high opportunity), commodities (low risk, high opportunity), and nuisance items (low risk, low opportunity).63 They are also keeping slow-moving
items in a central location and carrying fast-moving items in warehouses closer to customers. All
these strategies give them more flexibility should anything go wrong, as it often does, be it a dock
strike in California, a typhoon in Taiwan, a tsunami in Asia, or a hurricane in New Orleans.64
The ultimate answer to carrying near-zero inventory is to build for order, not for stock. Sony calls
it SOMO, “Sell one, make one.” Dell’s inventory strategy for years has been to get the customer to
order a computer and pay for it in advance. Then Dell uses the customer’s money to pay suppliers
to ship the necessary components. As long as customers do not need the item immediately, everyone can save money. Some retailers are unloading excess inventory on eBay where, by cutting
out the traditional liquidator middleman, they can make 60 to 80 cents on the dollar as opposed to
10 cents.65 And some suppliers are snapping up excess inventory to create opportunity.

Cameron Hughes

“If a winery has an eight-barrel lot, it may only use five
barrels for its customers,” says Cameron Hughes, a wine “négociant” who buys the excess juice
from high-end wineries and wine brokers and combines it to make limited edition, premium
blends that taste much more expensive than their price tags. Négociants have been around a
long time, first as middlemen who sold or shipped wine as wholesalers, but the profession has
expanded as opportunists such as Hughes became more involved in effectively making their
own wines. Hughes doesn’t own any grapes, bottling machines, or trucks. He outsources the
bottling, and he sells directly to retailers such as Costco, Sam’s Club, and Safeway, eliminating middlemen and multiple markups. Hughes never knows which or how many excess lots of
wine he will have, but he’s turned it to his advantage—he creates a new product with every
batch. This rapid turnover is part of Costco’s appeal for him. The discount store’s customers
love the idea of finding a rare bargain, and Hughes promotes his wines through in-store wine
tastings and insider e-mails that alert Costco customers to upcoming numbered lots. Because
lots sell out quickly, fans subscribe to Cameron’s e-mail alerts at chwine.com that tell them
when a new lot will be sold.66

TRANSPORTATION Transportation choices affect product pricing, on-time

Cameron Hughes has grown a
thriving business by using excess
lots of wine as input to his limitededition premium wines.

delivery performance, and the condition of the goods when they arrive, all of which
affect customer satisfaction.
In shipping goods to its warehouses, dealers, and customers, the company can
choose rail, air, truck, waterway, or pipeline. Shippers consider such criteria as speed,
frequency, dependability, capability, availability, traceability, and cost. For speed, air,
rail, and truck are the prime contenders. If the goal is low cost, then the choice is water or pipeline.
Shippers are increasingly combining two or more transportation modes, thanks to containerization. Containerization consists of putting the goods in boxes or trailers that are easy to transfer between two transportation modes. Piggyback describes the use of rail and trucks; fishyback, water
and trucks; trainship, water and rail; and airtruck, air and trucks. Each coordinated mode offers
specific advantages. For example, piggyback is cheaper than trucking alone yet provides flexibility
and convenience.
Shippers can choose private, contract, or common carriers. If the shipper owns its own truck or
air fleet, it becomes a private carrier. A contract carrier is an independent organization selling transportation services to others on a contract basis. A common carrier provides services between predetermined points on a scheduled basis and is available to all shippers at standard rates.
To reduce costly handing at arrival, some firms are putting items into shelf-ready packaging so
they don’t need to be unpacked from a box and placed on a shelf individually. In Europe, P&G uses

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

| CHAPTER 16

469

a three-tier logistic system to schedule deliveries of fast- and slow-moving goods, bulky items, and
small items in the most efficient way.67 To reduce damage in shipping, the size, weight, and fragility
of the item must be reflected in the crating technique used, the density of foam cushioning, etc.68

Organizational Lessons
Market-logistics strategies must be derived from business strategies, rather than solely from cost
considerations. The logistics system must be information-intensive and establish electronic links
among all the significant parties. Finally, the company should set its logistics goals to match or
exceed competitors’ service standards and should involve members of all relevant teams in the
planning process.
Today’s stronger demands for logistical support from large customers will increase suppliers’
costs. Customers want more frequent deliveries so they don’t have to carry as much inventory. They
want shorter order-cycle times, which means suppliers must have high in-stock availability.
Customers often want direct store delivery rather than shipments to distribution centers. They
want mixed pallets rather than separate pallets. They want tighter promised delivery times. They
may want custom packaging, price tagging, and display building.
Suppliers can’t say “no” to many of these requests, but at least they can set up different logistical
programs with different service levels and customer charges. Smart companies will adjust their offerings to each major customer’s requirements. The company’s trade group will set up differentiated
distribution by offering different bundled service programs for different customers.

Summary
1. Retailing includes all the activities involved in selling
goods or services directly to final consumers for personal, nonbusiness use. Retailers can be understood
in terms of store retailing, nonstore retailing, and retail
organizations.

5.

2. Like products, retail-store types pass through stages of
growth and decline. As existing stores offer more services to remain competitive, costs and prices go up,
which opens the door to new retail forms that offer a mix
of merchandise and services at lower prices. The major
types of retail stores are specialty stores, department
stores, supermarkets, convenience stores, discount
stores, extreme value or hard-discount store, off-price
retailers, superstores, and catalog showrooms.

6.

3. Although most goods and services are sold through
stores, nonstore retailing has been growing. The major
types of nonstore retailing are direct selling (one-to-one
selling, one-to-many party selling, and multilevel network marketing), direct marketing (which includes ecommerce and Internet retailing), automatic vending,
and buying services.
4. Although many retail stores are independently owned,
an increasing number are falling under some form of
corporate retailing. Retail organizations achieve many
economies of scale, greater purchasing power, wider
brand recognition, and better-trained employees.
The major types of corporate retailing are corporate
chain stores, voluntary chains, retailer cooperatives,

7.

8.

consumer cooperatives, franchise organizations, and
merchandising conglomerates.
The retail environment has changed considerably in recent years; as new retail forms have emerged, intertype
and store-based versus nonstore-based competition has
increased, the rise of giant retailers has been matched by
the decline of middle-market retailers, investment in
technology and global expansion has grown, and shopper marketing inside stores has become a priority.
Like all marketers, retailers must prepare marketing
plans that include decisions on target markets, channels, product assortment and procurement, prices,
services, store atmosphere, store activities and experiences, communications, and location.
Wholesaling includes all the activities in selling goods
or services to those who buy for resale or business
use. Wholesalers can perform functions better and
more cost-effectively than the manufacturer can. These
functions include selling and promoting, buying and
assortment building, bulk breaking, warehousing,
transportation, financing, risk bearing, dissemination of
market information, and provision of management
services and consulting.
There are four types of wholesalers: merchant wholesalers; brokers and agents; manufacturers’ and retailers’
sales branches, sales offices, and purchasing offices;
and miscellaneous wholesalers such as agricultural
assemblers and auction companies.

470

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

9. Like retailers, wholesalers must decide on target markets, product assortment and services, price, promotion, and place. The most successful wholesalers are
those who adapt their services to meet suppliers’ and
target customers’ needs.
10. Producers of physical products and services must decide on market logistics—the best way to store and

move goods and services to market destinations; to coordinate the activities of suppliers, purchasing agents,
manufacturers, marketers, channel members, and customers. Major gains in logistical efficiency have come
from advances in information technology.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Should National-Brand Manufacturers
Also Supply Private-Label Brands?
Ralston-Purina, Borden, ConAgra, and Heinz have all admitted to supplying products—sometimes lower in quality—to
be used for private labels. Other marketers, however, criticize
this “if you can’t beat them, join them” strategy, maintaining
that these actions, if revealed, may create confusion or even
reinforce a perception by consumers that all brands in a
category are essentially the same.
Take a position: Manufacturers should feel free to sell
private labels as a source of revenue versus National
manufacturers should never get involved with private
labels.

Marketing Excellence

>>Zara

Spain’s Zara has
become Europe’s leading apparel retailer, providing consumers with current, high fashion styles at reasonable prices. With over $8.7 billion in sales and more than
1,500 stores, the company’s success has come from breaking virtually every traditional rule in the retailing industry.
The first Zara store opened in 1975. By the 1980s,
Zara’s founder, Amancio Ortega, was working with

Marketing Discussion
Retail Customer Loyalty
Think of your favorite stores. What do they do that encourages your loyalty? What do you like about the in-store experience? What further improvements could they make?

computer programmers to develop a new distribution
model that would revolutionize the clothing industry. This
new model takes several strategic steps to reduce the lead
time from design to distribution to just two weeks—a significant difference from the industry average of six to nine
months. As a result, the company makes approximately
20,000 different items a year, about triple what Gap or H&M
make in a year. By reducing lead times to a fraction of its
competitors, Zara has been able to provide “fast fashion”
for its consumers at affordable prices. The company’s success lies within four key strategic elements:
Design and Production. Zara employs hundreds of
designers at its headquarters in Spain. Thus, new
styles are constantly being created and put into production while others are tweaked with new colors or
patterns. The firm enforces the speed at which it puts
these designs into production by locating half its production facilities nearby in Spain, Portugal, and
Morocco. Zara produces only a small quantity of each
collection and is willing to experience occasional
shortages to preserve an image of exclusivity. Clothes
with a longer shelf life, like T-shirts, are outsourced to
lower-cost suppliers in Asia and Turkey. With tight
control on its manufacturing process, Zara can move

MANAGING RETAILING, WHOLESALING, AND LOGISTICS

more rapidly than any of its competitors and continues to deliver fresh styles to its stores every week.
Logistics. Zara distributes all its merchandise, regardless of origin, from Spain. Its distribution process is
designed so that the time from receipt of an order to
delivery in the store averages 24 hours in Europe and
48 hours in the United States and Asia. Having 50 percent of its production facilities nearby is key to the
success of this model. All Zara stores receive new
shipments twice a week, and the small quantities of
each collection not only bring consumers back into
Zara stores over and over but also entice them to make
purchases more quickly. While an average shopper in
Spain visits a high street (or main street) store three
times a year, shoppers average 17 trips to Zara stores.
Some Zara fans know exactly when new shipments
arrive and show up early that day to be the first in line
for the latest fashions. These practices keep sales
strong throughout the year and help the company sell
more products at full price—85 percent of its merchandise versus the industry average of 60 percent.
Customers. Everything revolves around Zara’s customers. The retailer reacts to customers’ changing
needs, trends, and tastes with daily reports from Zara
shop managers about which products and styles
have sold and which haven’t. With up to 70 percent
of their salaries coming from commission, managers
have a strong incentive to stay on top of things.
Zara’s designers don’t have to predict what fashion
trends will be in the future. They react to customer
feedback—good and bad—and if something fails, the
line is withdrawn immediately. Zara cuts its losses
and the impact is minimal due to the low quantities of
each style produced.

Marketing Excellence

>>Best Buy

| CHAPTER 16

471

Stores. Zara has never run an advertising campaign.
The stores, 90 percent of which it owns, are the key
advertising element and are located in prestigious
high-traffic locations around the world. Zara spends
significant time and effort regularly changing store
windows to help lure customers in. In comparison to
other retailers, which spend 3 percent to 4 percent of
revenues on big brand-building campaigns, Zara
spends just 0.3 percent.
The company’s success comes from having complete control over all the parts of its business—
design, production, and distribution. Louis Vuitton’s fashion director, Daniel Piette, described Zara as “possibly the
most innovative and devastating retailer in the world.”
Now, as Zara continues to expand into new markets and
countries, it risks losing some of its speed and will have to
work hard to continue providing the same “newness”’ all
over the world that it does so well in Europe. It is also
making a somewhat belated major push online that will
need to work within its existing business model.
Questions
1. Would Zara’s model work for other retailers? Why or
why not?
2. How is Zara going to expand successfully all over
the world with the same level of speed and instant
fashion?
Sources: Rachel Tiplady, “Zara: Taking the Lead in Fast-Fashion.” BusinessWeek, April 4, 2006;
enotes.com, Inditex overview; “Zara: A Spanish Success Story.” CNN, June 15, 2001; “Fashion
Conquistador,” BusinessWeek, September 4, 2006; Caroline Raux, “The Reign of Spain.” The
Guardian, October 28, 2002; Kerry Capell, “Zara Thrives by Breaking All the Rules,”
BusinessWeek, October 20, 2008, p. 66; Christopher Bjork, “Zara Is to Get Big Online Push,”
Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2009, p. B8.

Best Buy is the world’s largest consumer electronics retailer, with $34.2 billion in sales in fiscal 2009. Sales
boomed in the 1980s as Best Buy expanded nationally
and made some risky business decisions, like putting its
sales staff on salary instead of commission pay. This decision created a more consumer-friendly, low-pressure
shopping atmosphere and resulted in an instant spike in
overall revenues. In the 1990s, Best Buy ramped up its
computer product offerings and, by 1995, was the
biggest seller of home PCs, a powerful position during the
Internet boom.
At the turn of the century, Best Buy faced new competitors like Costco and Walmart, which started ramping
up their electronics divisions and product offerings. Best
Buy believed the best way to differentiate itself was to increase its focus on customer service by selling product
warranties and offering personal services like installation
and at-home delivery. Its purchase of Geek Squad, a

472

PART 6

DELIVERING VALUE

24-hour computer service company, proved extremely
profitable and strategic as home and small office networks
became more complex and the need for personal computing attention increased. By 2004, Best Buy had placed a
Geek Squad station in each of its stores, providing consumers with personal computing services in the stores,
online, on the phone, and at home.
Today, Best Buy has adopted a corporate strategy it
calls Customer-Centricity. It has segmented its broad customer base into a handful of specific targets such as the
affluent tech geek, the busy suburban mom, the young
gadget enthusiast, and the price-conscious family dad.
Next, it uses extensive research and analysis to determine
which segments are the most abundant and lucrative in
each market. Finally, it configures its stores and trains its
employees to target those shoppers and encourage them
to keep coming back again and again. For example, stores
targeting affluent tech geeks have separate home theatre
departments with knowledgeable salespeople who can
spend time discussing all the different product options.
Stores with a high volume of suburban mom shoppers offer personal shopping assistants to help mom get in and
out as quickly as possible with the exact items she needs.
Sometimes a store will experience a new type of lucrative shopper. In the coastal town of Baytown, Texas,
the local Best Buy observed frequent visits from Eastern

European workers coming off cargo ships and oil tankers.
These men and women were using their precious free
time to race over to Best Buy and search the aisles for
Apple’s iPods and laptops, which are cheaper in the
United States than in Europe. To cater to this unique consumer, the local Best Buy rearranged its store, moved
iPods, MacBooks, and their accessories from the back of
the store to the front, and added signage in simple
English. The result: sales from these European workers
increased 67 percent.
This local ingenuity paired with the ability to cater to
each market and segment’s needs have helped Best Buy
survive the electronics storm while competitors like
CompUSA and Circuit City have failed. The business is
tough, with thin profit margins and continuously evolving
products. However, with over 1,300 stores, including locations in Canada, Mexico, China, and Turkey, Best Buy has
a 19 percent market share and a trusted, consumerfriendly brand.
Questions
1. What are the keys to Best Buy’s success? What are
the risks going forward?
2. How else can Best Buy compete against new competitors like Walmart and online companies?

This page intentionally left blank

PART 7 Communicating Value
Chapter 17 | Designing and Managing Integrated Marketing Communications
Chapter 18 | Managing Mass Communications: Advertising, Sales Promotions, Events and Experiences, and Public Relations
Chapter 19 | Managing Personal Communications: Direct and Interactive Marketing, Word of Mouth, and Personal Selling

r
e
t
ap
h
C

17

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What is the role of marketing communications?
2. How do marketing communications work?
3. What are the major steps in developing effective communications?
4. What is the communications mix, and how should it be set?
5. What is an integrated marketing communications program?

Ocean Spray has revitalized its brand
through extensive new product development and a thoroughly integrated modern
marketing communications program.

Designing and Managing
Integrated Marketing
Communications
Modern marketing calls for more than developing a good product, pricing it
attractively, and making it accessible. Companies must also communicate with their present and
potential stakeholders and the general public. For most marketers, therefore, the question is not
whether to communicate but rather what to say, how and when to say it, to whom, and how often.
Consumers can turn to hundreds of cable and satellite TV channels, thousands of magazines and
newspapers, and millions of Internet pages. They are taking a more active role in deciding what
communications they want to receive as well as how they want to communicate to others about
the products and services they use. To effectively reach and influence target markets, holistic
marketers are creatively employing multiple forms of communications. Ocean Spray—an agricultural
cooperative of cranberry growers—has used a variety of communication vehicles to turn its sales
fortunes around.

Facing stiff competition, a number of adverse consumer trends, and nearly a decade of
declining sales, Ocean Spray COO Ken Romanzi and Arnold Worldwide decided to
“reintroduce the cranberry to America” as the “surprisingly versatile little fruit that
supplies modern-day benefits,” through a true 360-degree campaign that used all
facets of marketing communications to reach consumers in a variety of settings. The
intent was to support the full range of products—cranberry sauce, fruit juices, and dried cranberries
in different forms—and leverage the fact that the brand was born in the cranberry bogs and
remained there still. The agency decided to tell an authentic, honest, and perhaps surprising story
dubbed “Straight from the Bog.” The campaign was designed to also reinforce two key brand benefits—that Ocean Spray products tasted good and were good for you. PR played a crucial role.
Miniature bogs were brought to Manhattan and featured on an NBC Today morning segment.
A “Bogs across America Tour” brought the experience to Los Angeles,
Chicago, and even London. Television and print advertising featured
Done right, marketing communications can have
two growers (depicted by actors) standing waist-deep in a bog and
a huge payoff. This chapter describes how communications
talking, often humorously, about what they did. The campaign also
work and what marketing communications can do for a
included a Web site, in-store displays, and events for consumers as
company. It also addresses how holistic marketers combine
well as for members of the growers’ cooperative itself. Product inno- and integrate marketing communications. Chapter 18
vation was crucial, too; new flavor blends were introduced, along with examines mass (nonpersonal) communications (advertising,
a line of 100 percent juice drinks, diet and light versions, and Craisins sales promotion, events and experiences, and public
sweetened dried cranberries. The campaign hit the mark, lifting sales relations and publicity); Chapter 19 examines personal
an average of 10 percent each year from 2005 to 2009 despite communications (direct and interactive marketing, word-ofmouth marketing, and personal selling).
continued decline in the fruit juice category.1

475

476

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

The Role of Marketing
Communications
Marketing communications are the means by which firms attempt to inform, persuade, and remind
consumers—directly or indirectly—about the products and brands they sell. In a sense, marketing
communications represent the voice of the company and its brands; they are a means by which the
firm can establish a dialogue and build relationships with consumers. By strengthening customer
loyalty, marketing communications can contribute to customer equity.
Marketing communications also work for consumers when they show how and why a product is
used, by whom, where, and when. Consumers can learn who makes the product and what the company and brand stand for, and they can get an incentive for trial or use. Marketing communications
allow companies to link their brands to other people, places, events, brands, experiences, feelings,
and things. They can contribute to brand equity—by establishing the brand in memory and creating a brand image—as well as drive sales and even affect shareholder value.2

The Changing Marketing Communications
Environment
Technology and other factors have profoundly changed the way consumers process communications, and even whether they choose to process them at all. The rapid diffusion of multipurpose
smart phones, broadband and wireless Internet connections, and ad-skipping digital video
recorders (DVRs) have eroded the effectiveness of the mass media. In 1960, a company could reach
80 percent of U.S. women with one 30-second commercial aired simultaneously on three TV networks: ABC, CBS, and NBC. Today, the same ad would have to run on 100 channels or more to
achieve this marketing feat. Consumers not only have more choices of media, they can also decide
whether and how they want to receive commercial content. “Marketing Insight: Don’t Touch That
Remote” describes developments in television advertising.

Marketing Insight
Don’t Touch That Remote
That consumers are more in charge in the marketplace is perhaps
nowhere more evident than in television broadcasting, where DVRs
allow consumers to skip past ads with a push of the fast-forward button.
Estimates had DVRs in 34 percent of U.S. households at the end of
2009, and of viewers who use them, between 60 percent and
70 percent fast-forward through commercials (the others either like
ads, don’t mind them, or can’t be bothered).
Is that all bad? Surprisingly, research shows that while focusing on
an ad in order to fast-forward through it, consumers actually retain and
recall a fair amount of information. The most successful ads in “fastforward mode” were those consumers had already seen, that used
familiar characters, and that didn’t have lots of scenes. It also helped to

have brand-related information in the center of the screen, where viewers’
eyes focus while skipping through. Although consumers are still more
likely to recall an ad the next day if they’ve watched it live, some brand
recall occurs even after an ad was deliberately zapped.
Another challenge marketers have faced for a long time is viewers’
tendency to switch channels during commercial breaks. Recently, however, Nielsen, which handles television program ratings, has begun to
offer ratings for specific ads. Before, advertisers had to pay based on
the rating of the program, even if as many as 5 percent to 15 percent of
consumers temporarily tuned away. Now they can pay based on the
actual commercial audience available when their ad is shown. To
increase viewership during commercial breaks, the major broadcast and
cable networks are shortening breaks and delaying them until viewers
are more likely to be engaged in a program.
Sources: Andrew O’Connell, “Advertisers: Learn to Love the DVR,” Harvard Business
Review, April 2010, p. 22; Erik du Plesis, “Digital Video Recorders and Inadvertent
Advertising Exposure,” Journal of Advertising Research 49 (June 2009); S. Adam
Brasel and James Gips, “Breaking Through Fast-Forwarding: Brand Information and
Visual Attention,” Journal of Marketing 72 (November 2008), pp. 31–48; “Watching
the Watchers,” Economist, November 15, 2008, p. 77; Stephanie Kang, “Why DVR
Viewers Recall Some TV Spots,” Wall Street Journal, February 26, 2008; Kenneth
C. Wilbur, “How Digital Video Recorder Changes Traditional Television Advertising,”
Journal of Advertising 37 (Summer 2008), pp. 143–49; Burt Helm, “Cable Takes
a Ratings Hit,” BusinessWeek, September 24, 2007.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 17

477

Ads are appearing everywhere—
even on eggs for this popular CBS
television show.

But as some marketers flee traditional media, they still encounter challenges. Commercial clutter is rampant. The average city dweller is exposed to an estimated 3,000 to 5,000 ad messages a day.
Short-form video content and ads appear at gas stations, grocery stores, doctors’ offices, and
big-box retailers. Supermarket eggs have been stamped with the name of CBS programs; subway
turnstiles carry GEICO’s name; Chinese food cartons promote Continental Airlines; and US
Airways has sold ads on its motion sickness bags. Dubai sold corporate branding rights to 23 of the
47 stops and two metro lines in its new mass transit rail system.3
Marketing communications in almost every medium and form have been on the rise, and some
consumers feel they are increasingly invasive. Marketers must be creative in using technology but
not intrude in consumers’ lives. Consider what Motorola did to solve that problem.4

Motorola At Hong Kong International Airport, Motorola’s special promotion enabled
loved ones to “Say Goodbye” via photos and messages sent from their phones to digital
billboards in the departure area. When they checked into the gate area, travelers saw photos of
the friends and family who had just dropped them off as part of a digital billboard in the image of
a giant Motorola mobile phone. The company also offered departing travelers special instructions
for using their phones to send a Motorola-branded good-bye video to friends and families, featuring soccer
star David Beckham and Asian pop star Jay Chou.

Motorola’s high-tech promotion
creatively allowed passengers and
those left behind to say one last
good-bye with digital billboards.

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Marketing Communications, Brand Equity,
and Sales
In this new communication environment, although advertising is often a central element of a
marketing communications program, it is usually not the only one—or even the most important
one—for sales and building brand and customer equity. Like many other firms, over a five-year
period from 2004 to 2008, Kimberly-Clark cut the percentage of its marketing budget spent on TV
from 60 percent to a little over 40 percent as it invested more heavily in Internet and experiential
marketing.5 Consider Gap’s effort in launching a new line of jeans.6

Gap

By 2009, with sales slumping, Gap decided to celebrate the 40th anniversary of
the opening of its first Gap store by introducing the “Born to Fit” 1969 Premium Jeans line. For
its launch, Gap moved away from its typical media-intensive ad campaign, as exemplified by
its popular 1998 “Khakis Swing” holiday ads. The campaign featured newer communications
elements such as a Facebook page, video clips, a realistic online fashion show on a virtual
catwalk, and a StyleMixer iPhone app. The app enabled users to mix and match clothes and organize
outfits, get feedback from Facebook friends, and receive discounts when near a Gap store. Simultaneous
in-store acoustic shows across 700 locations and temporary pop-up denim stores in major urban locations
added to the buzz.
Gap

478

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS MIX The marketing communications mix consists
of eight major modes of communication:7
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

Advertising—Any paid form of nonpersonal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods,
or services by an identified sponsor via print media (newspapers and magazines), broadcast
media (radio and television), network media (telephone, cable, satellite, wireless), electronic
media (audiotape, videotape, videodisk, CD-ROM, Web page), and display media (billboards,
signs, posters).
Sales promotion—A variety of short-term incentives to encourage trial or purchase of a product or service including consumer promotions (such as samples, coupons, and premiums),
trade promotions (such as advertising and display allowances), and business and sales force
promotions (contests for sales reps).
Events and experiences—Company-sponsored activities and programs designed to create
daily or special brand-related interactions with consumers, including sports, arts, entertainment, and cause events as well as less formal activities.
Public relations and publicity—A variety of programs directed internally to employees of the
company or externally to consumers, other firms, the government, and media to promote or
protect a company’s image or its individual product communications.
Direct marketing—Use of mail, telephone, fax, e-mail, or Internet to communicate directly
with or solicit response or dialogue from specific customers and prospects.
Interactive marketing—Online activities and programs designed to engage customers or
prospects and directly or indirectly raise awareness, improve image, or elicit sales of products
and services.
Word-of-mouth marketing—People-to-people oral, written, or electronic communications
that relate to the merits or experiences of purchasing or using products or services.
Personal selling—Face-to-face interaction with one or more prospective purchasers for the
purpose of making presentations, answering questions, and procuring orders.

Table 17.1 lists numerous communication platforms. Company communication goes
beyond these. The product’s styling and price, the shape and color of the package, the salesperson’s
manner and dress, the store décor, the company’s stationery—all communicate something to buyers. Every brand contact delivers an impression that can strengthen or weaken a customer’s view of
a company.8
Marketing communication activities contribute to brand equity and drive sales in many ways:
by creating brand awareness, forging brand image in consumers’ memories, eliciting positive brand
judgments or feelings, and strengthening consumer loyalty.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 17.1

| CHAPTER 17

479

Common Communication Platforms
Events and
Experiences

Public Relations
and Publicity

Direct and
Interactive
Marketing

Word-of-Mouth
Personal Selling
Marketing

Advertising

Sales Promotion

Print and
broadcast ads

Press kits

Catalogs

Person-to-person Sales presentations

Speeches

Mailings

Chat rooms

Sales meetings

Packaging–outer

Contests, games,
Sports
sweepstakes, lotteries Entertainment
Premiums and gifts
Festivals

Seminars

Telemarketing

Blogs

Incentive programs

Packaging inserts

Sampling

Arts

Annual reports

Cinema

Fairs and trade
shows

Causes

Brochures and
booklets

Exhibits

Posters and
leaflets

Demonstrations

Directories

Rebates

Reprints of ads

Low-interest financing

Billboards

Trade-in allowances

Coupons

Factory tours

Electronic
Charitable donations shopping
TV shopping
Publications

Company
museums

Community relations Fax
E-mail
Lobbying

Street activities Identity media
Company magazine

Voice mail
Company blogs
Web sites

Display signs

Continuity programs
Point-of-purchase Tie-ins
displays
DVDs

MARKETING COMMUNICATION EFFECTS The way brand associations are formed
does not matter. In other words, whether a consumer has an equally strong, favorable, and unique
brand association of Subaru with the concepts “outdoors,” “active,” and “rugged” because of
exposure to a TV ad that shows the car driving over rugged terrain at different times of the year, or
because Subaru sponsors ski, kayak, and mountain bike events, the impact in terms of Subaru’s
brand equity should be identical.
But these marketing communications activities must be integrated to deliver a consistent
message and achieve the strategic positioning. The starting point in planning marketing communications is a communication audit that profiles all interactions customers in the target market
may have with the company and all its products and services. For example, someone interested in
purchasing a new laptop computer might talk to others, see television ads, read articles, look for
information on the Internet, and look at laptops in a store.
To implement the right communications programs and allocate dollars efficiently, marketers
need to assess which experiences and impressions will have the most influence at each stage of the
buying process. Armed with these insights, they can judge marketing communications according to
their ability to affect experiences and impressions, build customer loyalty and brand equity, and
drive sales. For example, how well does a proposed ad campaign contribute to awareness or to creating, maintaining, or strengthening brand associations? Does a sponsorship improve consumers’
brand judgments and feelings? Does a promotion encourage consumers to buy more of a product?
At what price premium?
In building brand equity, marketers should be “media neutral” and evaluate all communication
options on effectiveness (how well does it work?) and efficiency (how much does it cost?). Personal
financial Web site Mint challenged market leader Intuit—and was eventually acquired by the
company—on a marketing budget a fraction of what companies typically spend. A well-read blog,
a popular Facebook page, and other social media—combined with extensive PR—helped attract
the younger crowd the Mint brand was after.9 Philips also took another tack in launching a
new product.10

Samples
Fairs and trade
shows

480

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Philips Carousel

When Dutch electronics leader Philips wanted to demonstrate the quality of the “world’s first cinema proportion” TV, it chose to create Carousel, an
interactive, long-form Internet film. In this Cannes Grand Prix award-winning effort, online
viewers could control the story of a botched robbery while seeing the benefits of the new
$3,999 home cinema TV. The film showed an epic “frozen moment”
cops and robbers shootout sequence that included clowns, explosions, a
decimated hospital, and lots of broken glass, bullet casings, and money.
By clicking hot spots in the video, viewers could toggle between the new
set’s 21:9 display proportion and a conventional flat screen’s 16:9, as
well as activate the set’s signature Ambilight backlighting. The success
of the campaign led Phillips to launch a “Parallel Lines” campaign with
five short films from famed director Ridley Scott’s shop, promoting its
whole range of home cinema TVs.
The runaway success of the interactive, long-form Internet film
Carousel for its new Home
Cinema TV model led Philips to
launch an even more extensive
follow-up campaign.

The Communications Process Models
Marketers should understand the fundamental elements of effective communications. Two models
are useful: a macromodel and a micromodel.

MACROMODEL OF THE COMMUNICATIONS PROCESS
Figure 17.1 shows a
macromodel with nine key factors in effective communication. Two represent the major parties—
sender and receiver. Two represent the major tools—message and media. Four represent major
communication functions—encoding, decoding, response, and feedback. The last element in the
system is noise, random and competing messages that may interfere with the intended
communication.11
Senders must know what audiences they want to reach and what responses they want to get.
They must encode their messages so the target audience can decode them. They must transmit the
message through media that reach the target audience and develop feedback channels to monitor
the responses. The more the sender’s field of experience overlaps that of the receiver, the more
effective the message is likely to be. Note that selective attention, distortion, and retention
processes—concepts first introduced in Chapter 6—may be operating during communication.
MICROMODEL OF CONSUMER RESPONSES Micromodels of marketing communications
concentrate on consumers’ specific responses to communications.
Figure 17.2 summarizes four
classic response hierarchy models.
All these models assume the buyer passes through cognitive, affective, and behavioral stages, in
that order. This “learn-feel-do” sequence is appropriate when the audience has high involvement
with a product category perceived to have high differentiation, such as an automobile or house. An
alternative sequence, “do-feel-learn,” is relevant when the audience has high involvement but perceives little or no differentiation within the product category, such as an airline ticket or personal

|Fig. 17.1|

Elements in the
Communications
Process

SENDER

Encoding

Message

Decoding

Media

Noise

Feedback

Response

RECEIVER

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

Models

Stages

AIDA
Modela

Hierarchy-of-Effects
Modelb

Attention

Innovation-Adoption
Modelc

Awareness

Affective
Stage

Liking

Communications
Modeld
Exposure

Knowledge

Interest

Reception
Cognitive response

Interest

Attitude

Evaluation

Intention

Preference
Desire

Conviction

Trial
Behavior
Stage

Action

Purchase

Behavior
Adoption

computer. A third sequence, “learn-do-feel,” is relevant when the audience has low involvement and
perceives little differentiation, such as with salt or batteries. By choosing the right sequence, the
marketer can do a better job of planning communications.12
Let’s assume the buyer has high involvement with the product category and perceives high
differentiation within it. We will illustrate the hierarchy-of-effects model (the second column of
Figure 17.2) in the context of a marketing communications campaign for a small Iowa college
named Pottsville:
•

•

•

•

•

•

481

|Fig. 17.2|

Awareness
Cognitive
Stage

| CHAPTER 17

Awareness. If most of the target audience is unaware of the object, the communicator’s task is
to build awareness. Suppose Pottsville seeks applicants from Nebraska but has no name recognition there, although 30,000 Nebraska high school juniors and seniors could be interested in
it. The college might set the objective of making 70 percent of these students aware of its name
within one year.
Knowledge. The target audience might have brand awareness but not know much more.
Pottsville may want its target audience to know it is a private four-year college with excellent
programs in English, foreign languages, and history. It needs to learn how many people in the
target audience have little, some, or much knowledge about Pottsville. If knowledge is weak,
Pottsville may select brand knowledge as its communications objective.
Liking. Given target members know the brand, how do they feel about it? If the audience
looks unfavorably on Pottsville College, the communicator needs to find out why. In the case
of real problems, Pottsville will need to fix these and then communicate its renewed quality.
Good public relations calls for “good deeds followed by good words.”
Preference. The target audience might like the product but not prefer it to others. The
communicator must then try to build consumer preference by comparing quality, value,
performance, and other features to those of likely competitors.
Conviction. A target audience might prefer a particular product but not develop a conviction
about buying it. The communicator’s job is to build conviction and intent to apply among students interested in Pottsville College.
Purchase. Finally, some members of the target audience might have conviction but not quite
get around to making the purchase. The communicator must lead these consumers to take the
final step, perhaps by offering the product at a low price, offering a premium, or letting them
try it out. Pottsville might invite selected high school students to visit the campus and attend
some classes, or it might offer partial scholarships to deserving students.

Response Hierarchy
Models
Sources: aE. K. Strong, The Psychology of Selling
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1925), p. 9; bRobert J.
Lavidge and Gary A. Steiner, “A Model for Predictive
Measurements of Advertising Effectiveness,” Journal
of Marketing (October 1961), p. 61; cEverett M.
Rogers, Diffusion of Innovation (New York: Free
Press, 1962), pp. 79–86; dvarious sources.

482

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

To see how fragile the communication process is, assume the probability of each of the six steps
being successfully accomplished is 50 percent. The laws of probability suggest that the likelihood of
all six steps occurring successfully, assuming they are independent events, is .5 × .5 × .5 × .5 × .5 × .5,
which equals 1.5625 percent. If the probability of each step’s occurring were, on average, a more
moderate 10 percent, then the joint probability of all six events occurring is .0001 percent—or only
1 chance in 1,000,000!
To increase the odds for a successful marketing communications campaign, marketers must
attempt to increase the likelihood that each step occurs. For example, the ideal ad campaign would
ensure that:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

The right consumer is exposed to the right message at the right place and at the right time.
The ad causes the consumer to pay attention but does not distract from the intended message.
The ad properly reflects the consumer’s level of understanding of and behaviors with the
product and the brand.
The ad correctly positions the brand in terms of desirable and deliverable points-of-difference
and points-of-parity.
The ad motivates consumers to consider purchase of the brand.
The ad creates strong brand associations with all these stored communications effects so they
can have an impact when consumers are considering making a purchase.

The challenges in achieving success with communications necessitates careful planning, a topic we
turn to next.

Identify target
audience

Determine
objectives

Design
communications

Select
channels

Establish
budget

Decide on
media mix

Developing Effective
Communications
Figure 17.3 shows the eight steps in developing effective communications. We begin with the
basics: identifying the target audience, determining the objectives, designing the communications,
selecting the channels, and establishing the budget.

Identify the Target Audience
The process must start with a clear target audience in mind: potential buyers of the company’s
products, current users, deciders, or influencers, and individuals, groups, particular publics, or the
general public. The target audience is a critical influence on the communicator’s decisions about
what to say, how, when, where, and to whom.
Though we can profile the target audience in terms of any of the market segments identified in
Chapter 8, it’s often useful to do so in terms of usage and loyalty. Is the target new to the category or
a current user? Is the target loyal to the brand, loyal to a competitor, or someone who switches
between brands? If a brand user, is he or she a heavy or light user? Communication strategy will differ depending on the answers. We can also conduct image analysis by profiling the target audience
in terms of brand knowledge.

Determine the Communications Objectives
Measure
results

As we showed with Pottsville College, marketers can set communications objectives at any level of the hierarchy-of-effects model. John R. Rossiter and Larry Percy identify four possible objectives, as follows:13
1.

Manage integrated
marketing
communications

|Fig. 17.3|

Steps in Developing
Effective
Communications

2.

Category Need—Establishing a product or service category as necessary to remove or satisfy a
perceived discrepancy between a current motivational state and a desired motivational state.
A new-to-the-world product such as electric cars will always begin with a communications
objective of establishing category need.
Brand Awareness—Fostering the consumer’s ability to recognize or recall the brand within
the category, in sufficient detail to make a purchase. Recognition is easier to achieve than
recall—consumers asked to think of a brand of frozen entrées are more likely to recognize
Stouffer’s distinctive orange packages than to recall the brand. Brand recall is important
outside the store; brand recognition is important inside the store. Brand awareness provides a
foundation for brand equity.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

3.

4.

| CHAPTER 17

Brand Attitude—Helping consumers evaluate the brand’s perceived ability to meet a currently relevant need. Relevant brand needs may be negatively oriented (problem removal,
problem avoidance, incomplete satisfaction, normal depletion) or positively oriented (sensory gratification, intellectual stimulation, or social approval). Household cleaning products
often use problem solution; food products, on the other hand, often use sensory-oriented
ads emphasizing appetite appeal.
Brand Purchase Intention—Moving consumers to decide to purchase the brand or take
purchase-related action. Promotional offers like coupons or two-for-one deals encourage
consumers to make a mental commitment to buy. But many consumers do not have an
expressed category need and may not be in the market when exposed to an ad, so they are
unlikely to form buy intentions. In any given week, only about 20 percent of adults may be
planning to buy detergent, only 2 percent to buy a carpet cleaner, and only 0.25 percent to
buy a car.

The most effective communications can achieve multiple objectives. To promote its Smart Grid
technology program, GE pushed a number of buttons.14

GE Smart Grid

The vision of GE’s Smart Grid program is to fundamentally
overhaul the United States’ power grid, making it more efficient and sustainable and able also to
deliver renewable-source energy such as wind and solar. An integrated campaign of print, TV,
and online ads and an online augmented-reality demo was designed to increase understanding
and support of the Smart Grid and GE’s leadership in solving technological problems. GE and its
agency partner BBDO chose to employ engaging creative and familiar cultural references to address the technical issues involved. In its 2009 Super Bowl launch TV spot, the famous scarecrow character from The
Wizard of Oz was shown bouncing along the top of a transmission tower singing, “If I Only Had a Brain.” A
narrator voiced over the key communication message, “Smart Grid makes the way we distribute electricity
more efficient simply by making it more intelligent.” One online ad used a flock of birds on electrical wires
chirping and flapping their wings in synchronized rhythm to Rossini’s “Barber of Seville.” Another showed
power lines becoming banjo strings for electrical pylons to play “O Susannah.” After drawing the audience in,
the ads lay out the basic intent of the Smart Grid with links to more information. The augmented-reality GE
microsite PlugIntoTheSmartGrid.com allowed users to create a digital hologram of Smart Grid technology using computer peripherals and 3D graphics.

GE’s Smart Grid campaign has
accomplished several different
objectives for the GE brand,
including strengthening the
company’s reputation as
innovative.

483

484

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Design the Communications
Formulating the communications to achieve the desired response requires solving three problems:
what to say (message strategy), how to say it (creative strategy), and who should say it (message source).

MESSAGE STRATEGY In determining message strategy, management searches for appeals,
themes, or ideas that will tie in to the brand positioning and help establish points-of-parity or
points-of-difference. Some of these may be related directly to product or service performance (the
quality, economy, or value of the brand), whereas others may relate to more extrinsic
considerations (the brand as being contemporary, popular, or traditional).
Researcher John C. Maloney felt buyers expected one of four types of reward from a product:
rational, sensory, social, or ego satisfaction.15 Buyers might visualize these rewards from resultsof-use experience, product-in-use experience, or incidental-to-use experience. Crossing the four
types of rewards with the three types of experience generates 12 types of messages. For example,
the appeal “gets clothes cleaner” is a rational-reward promise following results-of-use experience. The phrase “real beer taste in a great light beer” is a sensory-reward promise connected
with product-in-use experience.
CREATIVE STRATEGY Communications effectiveness depends on how a message is being
expressed, as well as on its content. If a communication is ineffective, it may mean the wrong
message was used, or the right one was poorly expressed. Creative strategies are the way marketers
translate their messages into a specific communication. We can broadly classify them as either
informational or transformational appeals.16

Informational Appeals An informational appeal elaborates on product or service attributes or

Pringles capitalized on the popping
sound that occurs when its package is opened to develop a highly
successful ad campaign.

benefits. Examples in advertising are problem solution ads (Excedrin stops the toughest headache
pain), product demonstration ads (Thompson Water Seal can withstand intense rain, snow, and
heat), product comparison ads (DIRECTV offers better HD options than cable or other satellite
operators), and testimonials from unknown or celebrity endorsers (NBA phenomenon LeBron
James pitching Nike, Sprite, and McDonald’s). Informational appeals assume strictly rational
processing of the communication on the consumer’s part. Logic and reason rule.
Carl Hovland’s research at Yale has shed much light on informational appeals and their relationship to such issues as conclusion drawing, one-sided versus two-sided arguments, and order
of argument presentation. Some early experiments supported stating conclusions for the audience. Subsequent research, however, indicates that the best ads ask questions and allow readers
and viewers to form their own conclusions.17 If Honda had hammered away that the Element was
for young people, this strong definition might have blocked older drivers from buying it. Some
stimulus ambiguity can lead to a broader market definition and more spontaneous purchases.
You might expect one-sided presentations that praise a product to be more effective than
two-sided arguments that also mention shortcomings. Yet two-sided messages may be more
appropriate, especially when negative associations must be overcome.18 Two-sided messages are
more effective with more educated audiences and those who are initially opposed.19 Chapter 6
described how Domino’s took the drastic step of admitting its
pizza’s taste problems to try to change the minds of consumers
with negative perceptions.
Finally, the order in which arguments are presented is important.20 In a one-sided message, presenting the strongest argument
first arouses attention and interest, important in media where the
audience often does not attend to the whole message. With a captive
audience, a climactic presentation might be more effective. For a
two-sided message, if the audience is initially opposed, the communicator might start with the other side’s argument and conclude
with his or her strongest argument.21

Transformational Appeals A transformational appeal elaborates
on a nonproduct-related benefit or image. It might depict what kind
of person uses a brand (VW advertised to active, youthful people
with its famed “Drivers Wanted” campaign) or what kind of
experience results from use (Pringles advertised “Once You Pop, the

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

Fun Don’t Stop” for years). Transformational appeals often attempt to stir up emotions that will
motivate purchase.
Communicators use negative appeals such as fear, guilt, and shame to get people to do things
(brush their teeth, have an annual health checkup) or stop doing things (smoking, abusing alcohol,
overeating). Fear appeals work best when they are not too strong, when source credibility is high,
and when the communication promises, in a believable and efficient way, to relieve the fear it
arouses. Messages are most persuasive when moderately discrepant with audience beliefs. Stating
only what the audience already believes at best just reinforces beliefs, and if the messages are too
discrepant, audiences will counterargue and disbelieve them.22
Communicators also use positive emotional appeals such as humor, love, pride, and joy.
Motivational or “borrowed interest” devices—such as the presence of cute babies, frisky puppies,
popular music, or provocative sex appeals—are often employed to attract attention and raise involvement with an ad. These techniques are thought necessary in the tough new media environment characterized by low-involvement consumer processing and competing ad and programming
clutter. Attention-getting tactics are often too effective. They may also detract from comprehension,
wear out their welcome fast, and overshadow the product.23 Thus, one challenge is figuring out
how to “break through the clutter” and deliver the intended message.
Even highly entertaining and creative means of expression must still keep the appropriate
consumer perspective. Toyota was sued in Los Angeles for a promotional campaign designed to
create buzz for its youth-targeted Toyota Matrix. The online effort featured a series of e-mails to
customers from a fictitious drunken British soccer hooligan, Sebastian Bowler. In his e-mails, he
announced that he knew the recipient and was coming to stay with his pit bull, Trigger, to “avoid
the cops.” In her suit, the plaintiff said she was so convinced that “a disturbed and aggressive”
stranger was headed to her house that she slept with a machete next to her in bed.24
The magic of advertising is to bring concepts on a piece of paper to life in the minds of the
consumer target. In a print ad, the communicator must decide on headline, copy, illustration,
and color.25 For a radio message, the communicator must choose words, voice qualities, and
vocalizations. The sound of an announcer promoting a used automobile should be different
from one promoting a new Cadillac. If the message is to be carried on television or in person, all
these elements plus body language must be planned. For the message to go online, layout, fonts,
graphics, and other visual and verbal information must be laid out.

MESSAGE SOURCE Messages delivered by attractive or popular sources can achieve higher
attention and recall, which is why advertisers often use celebrities as spokespeople.
Celebrities are likely to be effective when they are credible or personify a key product attribute.
Statesman-like Dennis Haysbert for State Farm insurance, rugged Brett Favre for Wrangler jeans,
and one-time television sweetheart Valerie Bertinelli for Jenny Craig weight loss program have all
been praised by consumers as good fits. Celine Dion, however, failed to add glamour—or sales—to
Chrysler, and even though she was locked into a three-year, $14 million deal, she was let go. Ozzy
Osbourne would seem an odd choice to advertise “I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter” given his seemingly perpetual confusion.
What is important is the spokesperson’s credibility. The three most often identified sources of
credibility are expertise, trustworthiness, and likability.26 Expertise is the specialized knowledge the
communicator possesses to back the claim. Trustworthiness describes how objective and honest the
source is perceived to be. Friends are trusted more than strangers or salespeople, and people who
are not paid to endorse a product are viewed as more trustworthy than people who are paid.27
Likability describes the source’s attractiveness. Qualities such as candor, humor, and naturalness
make a source more likable.
The most highly credible source would score high on all three dimensions—expertise, trustworthiness, and likability. Pharmaceutical companies want doctors to testify about product
benefits because doctors have high credibility. Charles Schwab became the centerpiece of ads
for his $4 billion-plus discount brokerage firm via the “Talk to Chuck” corporate advertising
campaign. Another credible pitchman was boxer George Foreman and his multimillion-selling
Lean, Mean, Fat-Reducing Grilling Machine. “Marketing Insight: Celebrity Endorsements as a
Strategy” focuses on the use of testimonials.
If a person has a positive attitude toward a source and a message, or a negative attitude toward
both, a state of congruity is said to exist. But what happens if a consumer hears a likable celebrity
praise a brand she dislikes? Charles Osgood and Percy Tannenbaum believe attitude change will take

| CHAPTER 17

485

486

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Marketing Insight
Celebrity Endorsements as a
Strategy
A well-chosen celebrity can draw attention to a product or brand—as
Priceline found when it picked Star Trek icon William Shatner to star in
campy ads to reinforce its low-price image. The quirky campaigns have
run over a decade, and Shatner’s decision to receive compensation in
the form of stock options reportedly allowed him to net over $600 million for his work. The right celebrity can also lend his or her image to a
brand. To reinforce its high status and prestige image, American Express
has used movie legends Robert De Niro and Martin Scorsese in ads.
The choice of celebrity is critical. The person should have high
recognition, high positive affect, and high appropriateness or “fit” with
the product. Paris Hilton, Howard Stern, and Donald Trump have high
recognition but negative affect among many groups. Johnny Depp has
high recognition and high positive affect but might not seem relevant,
for example, for advertising a new financial service. Tom Hanks and
Oprah Winfrey could successfully advertise a large number of products
because they have extremely high ratings for familiarity and likability
(known as the Q factor in the entertainment industry).
Celebrities can play a more fundamentally strategic role for their
brands, not only endorsing a product but also helping to design, position, and sell merchandise and services. Believing elite athletes have
unique insights into sports performance, Nike often brings its athletic
endorsers in on product design. Tiger Woods, Paul Casey, and Stewart
Cink have helped to design, prototype, and test new golf clubs and balls
at Nike Golf’s Research & Development facility dubbed “The Oven.”

Some celebrities lend their talents to brands without directly using
their fame. A host of movie and TV stars—including Kiefer Sutherland
(Bank of America), Alec Baldwin (Blockbuster), Patrick Dempsey (State
Farm), Lauren Graham (Special K), and Regina King (Always)—do uncredited commercial voice-overs. Although advertisers assume some
viewers will recognize the voices, the basic rationale for uncredited
celebrity voice-overs is the incomparable voice talents and skills they
bring from their acting careers.
Using celebrities poses certain risks. The celebrity might hold out
for a larger fee at contract renewal or withdraw. And just like movies and
album releases, celebrity campaigns can be expensive flops. The
celebrity might lose popularity or, even worse, get caught in a scandal or
embarrassing situation, as did Tiger Woods in a heavily publicized 2009
episode. Besides carefully checking endorsers’ backgrounds, some
marketers are choosing to use more than one to lessen their brand’s
exposure to any single person’s flaws.
Another solution is for marketers to create their own brand celebrities. Dos Equis beer, imported from Mexico, grew U.S. sales by over
20 percent during the recent recession by riding on the popularity of its
“Most Interesting Man in the World” ad campaign. Suave, debonair, with
an exotic accent and a silver beard, the character has hundreds of thousands of Facebook friends despite being, of course, completely fictitious. Videos of his exploits log millions of views on YouTube. He even
served as the basis of The Most Interesting Show in the World tour of
the brand’s 14 biggest urban markets, which featured one-of-a-kind
circus-type performers such as a flaming bowling-ball-juggling stunt
comedian, a robot-inspired break dancer, and a contortionist who
shoots arrows with her feet. Through a combination of advertising and
media coverage, almost 100 million media impressions were achieved
on the tour.
Sources: Scott Huver, “Here’s the Pitch!,” TV Guide, May 23, 2010; Linda
Massarella, “Shatner’s Singing a Happy Tune,” Toronto Sun, May 2, 2010; “Nike
Golf Celebrates Achievements and Successes of Past Year,” www.worldgolf.com,
January 2, 2009; Piet Levy, “Keeping It Interesting,” Marketing News, October 30,
2009, p. 8; Keith Naughton, “The Soft Sell,” Newsweek, February 2, 2004, pp. 46–47;
Irving Rein, Philip Kotler, and Martin Scoller, The Making and Marketing of
Professionals into Celebrities (Chicago: NTC Business Books, 1997).

place in the direction of increasing the amount of congruity between the two evaluations.28 The
consumer will end up respecting the celebrity somewhat less or the brand somewhat more. If she
encounters the same celebrity praising other disliked brands, she will eventually develop a negative
view of the celebrity and maintain negative attitudes toward the brands. The principle of
congruity implies that communicators can use their good image to reduce some negative feelings
toward a brand but in the process might lose some esteem with the audience.

Select the Communications Channels
Selecting an efficient means to carry the message becomes more difficult as channels of communication become more fragmented and cluttered. Communications channels may be personal and
nonpersonal. Within each are many subchannels.

PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS Personal communications channels let
two or more persons communicate face-to-face or person-to-audience through a phone, surface

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

mail, or e-mail. They derive their effectiveness from
individualized presentation and feedback and include direct
and interactive marketing, word-of-mouth marketing, and
personal selling.
We can draw a further distinction between advocate,
expert, and social communications channels. Advocate channels consist of company salespeople contacting buyers in the
target market. Expert channels consist of independent experts making statements to target buyers. Social channels
consist of neighbors, friends, family members, and associates talking to target buyers.
A study by Burson-Marsteller and Roper Starch
Worldwide found that one influential person’s word of
mouth tends to affect the buying attitudes of two other
people, on average. That circle of influence, however, jumps
to eight online. Word about good companies travels fast;
word about bad companies travels even faster. Reaching the
right people is key.
More advertisers now seek greater earned media—unsolicited professional commentary, personal blog entries, social network discussion—as a result of their paid media marketing efforts. Kimberly-Clark ran a
30-second TV spot prior to the Academy Awards in March 2010 for its Poise brand, which featured Whoopi Goldberg portraying famous women in history who may have suffered from incontinence. The goal was to get people talking, and talk they did! A social media avalanche followed,
culminating in a Saturday Night Live spoof, which eventually added up to 200 million PR impressions in total.29
Personal influence carries especially great weight (1) when products are expensive, risky, or purchased infrequently, and (2) when products suggest something about the user’s status or taste.
People often ask others to recommend a doctor, plumber, hotel, lawyer, accountant, architect, insurance agent, interior decorator, or financial consultant. If we have confidence in the recommendation, we normally act on the referral. Service providers clearly have a strong interest in building
referral sources.
Even business-to-business marketers can benefit from strong word of mouth. Here is how John
Deere created anticipation and excitement when introducing its 764 High Speed Dozer, the category’s first launch in 25 years.30

John Deere

Leading up to the unveiling of its high-speed dozer at the industry’s
largest CONEXPO trade show, John Deere created an extensive PR campaign. First, e-mail announcements were sent to all trade show registrants with images of the dozer covered in a tarp
and teasing headlines, such as “Just a Few Years Ahead of the Competition” and “The Shape of
Things to Come.” Editors received an invitation to attend a closed-door press conference where
they were given a VIP pass and admittance to a special viewing area at the CONEXPO show. Finally, editors
were told they could also register for a special, invitation-only press conference with John Deere senior
executives, including its CEO. Approximately 2,000 people attended the trade show for a rock-star unveiling
of the dozer, with about 80 editors present. Customers at the event who declared their desire for the machine
helped Deere staff secure more leads. Press reaction was also extremely positive, including several trade
magazine cover stories on the dozer and three segments on CNBC. The integrated effort on behalf of John
Deere, which included print ads in trade publications, took home the Grand CEBA Award in American
Business Media’s annual awards competition.

NONPERSONAL (MASS) COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS Nonpersonal channels
are communications directed to more than one person and include advertising, sales promotions,
events and experiences, and public relations. Much recent growth has taken place through events
and experiences. Events marketers who once favored sports events are now using other venues such
as art museums, zoos, and ice shows to entertain clients and employees. AT&T and IBM sponsor

| CHAPTER 17

487

William Shatner has become the
quirky but beloved spokesperson
for Priceline in its advertising.

488

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Through its print ad and trade show efforts, John Deere created buzz and much
word of mouth in anticipation of the launch of its new high-speed dozer.

symphony performances and art exhibits, Visa is an active sponsor of the Olympics,
and Harley-Davidson sponsors annual motorcycle rallies.
Companies are searching for better ways to quantify the benefits of sponsorship
and demanding greater accountability from event owners and organizers. They are
also creating events designed to surprise the public and create a buzz. Many efforts amount to guerrilla marketing tactics. As part of a $100 million global advertising and marketing campaign for its
line of televisions, LG Electronics developed an elaborate promotion for a fake new TV series,
Scarlet, including a heavily promoted Hollywood world premiere. Inside, attendees found a new series of actual LG TVs with a red back panel. Teaser TV and online commercials and extensive PR
backed the effort.31
Events can create attention, although whether they have a lasting effect on brand awareness,
knowledge, or preference will vary considerably depending on the quality of the product, the event
itself, and its execution.

INTEGRATION OF COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS Although personal communication is often more effective than mass communication, mass media might be the major means of
stimulating personal communication. Mass communications affect personal attitudes and
behavior through a two-step process. Ideas often flow from radio, television, and print to opinion
leaders, and from these to less media-involved population groups.
This two-step flow has several implications. First, the influence of mass media on public opinion is not as direct, powerful, and automatic as marketers have supposed. It is mediated by opinion
leaders, people whose opinions others seek or who carry their opinions to others. Second, the twostep flow challenges the notion that consumption styles are primarily influenced by a “trickledown” or “trickle-up” effect from mass media. People interact primarily within their own social
groups and acquire ideas from opinion leaders in their groups. Third, two-step communication
suggests that mass communicators should direct messages specifically to opinion leaders and let
them carry the message to others.

Establish the Total Marketing Communications Budget
One of the most difficult marketing decisions is determining how much to spend on marketing
communications. John Wanamaker, the department store magnate, once said, “I know that half of
my advertising is wasted, but I don’t know which half.”
Industries and companies vary considerably in how much they spend on marketing communications. Expenditures might be 40 percent to 45 percent of sales in the cosmetics industry, but only

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 17

489

5 percent to 10 percent in the industrial-equipment industry. Within a given industry, there are low- and high-spending companies.
How do companies decide on the communication budget? We will describe four
common methods: the affordable method, the percentage-of-sales method, the competitive-parity method, and the objective-and-task method.

AFFORDABLE METHOD Some companies set the communication budget at
what they think the company can afford. The affordable method completely ignores
the role of promotion as an investment and the immediate impact of promotion on
sales volume. It leads to an uncertain annual budget, which makes long-range
planning difficult.

PERCENTAGE-OF-SALES METHOD Some companies set communication
expenditures at a specified percentage of current or anticipated sales or of the sales
price. Automobile companies typically budget a fixed percentage based on the
planned car price. Oil companies appropriate a fraction of a cent for each gallon of
gasoline sold under their own label.
Supporters of the percentage-of-sales method see a number of advantages. First,
communication expenditures will vary with what the company can afford. This
satisfies financial managers, who believe expenses should be closely related to the
movement of corporate sales over the business cycle. Second, it encourages management to think of the relationship among communication cost, selling price, and
profit per unit. Third, it encourages stability when competing firms spend approximately the same percentage of their sales on communications.
In spite of these advantages, the percentage-of-sales method has little to justify it.
It views sales as the determiner of communications rather than as the result. It leads
to a budget set by the availability of funds rather than by market opportunities. It
discourages experimentation with countercyclical communication or aggressive
spending. Dependence on year-to-year sales fluctuations interferes with long-range
planning. There is no logical basis for choosing the specific percentage, except what
has been done in the past or what competitors are doing. Finally, it does not encourage building the communication budget by determining what each product and
territory deserves.
COMPETITIVE-PARITY METHOD Some companies set their communication budget to
achieve share-of-voice parity with competitors. There are two supporting arguments: that
competitors’ expenditures represent the collective wisdom of the industry, and that maintaining
competitive parity prevents communication wars. Neither argument is valid. There are no
grounds for believing competitors know better. Company reputations, resources, opportunities,
and objectives differ so much that communication budgets are hardly a guide. And there is no
evidence that budgets based on competitive parity discourage communication wars.

OBJECTIVE-AND-TASK METHOD The objective-and-task method calls upon marketers to
develop communication budgets by defining specific objectives, determining the tasks that must be
performed to achieve these objectives, and estimating the costs of performing them. The sum of
these costs is the proposed communication budget.
Suppose Dr. Pepper Snapple Group wants to introduce a new natural energy drink, called
Sunburst, for the casual athlete.32 Its objectives might be as follows:
1.
2.
3.

Establish the market share goal. The company estimates 50 million potential users and sets a
target of attracting 8 percent of the market—that is, 4 million users.
Determine the percentage of the market that should be reached by advertising. The advertiser hopes to reach 80 percent (40 million prospects) with its advertising message.
Determine the percentage of aware prospects that should be persuaded to try the
brand. The advertiser would be pleased if 25 percent of aware prospects (10 million) tried
Sunburst. It estimates that 40 percent of all triers, or 4 million people, will become loyal
users. This is the market goal.

To promote its new line of televisions, LG pretended to launch a
fake new TV series, even holding
a heavily promoted premiere.

490

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

4.

5.

6.

Determine the number of advertising impressions per 1 percent trial rate. The advertiser estimates that 40 advertising impressions (exposures) for every 1 percent of the population will
bring about a 25 percent trial rate.
Determine the number of gross rating points that would have to be purchased. A gross rating
point is one exposure to 1 percent of the target population. Because the company wants to achieve
40 exposures to 80 percent of the population, it will want to buy 3,200 gross rating points.
Determine the necessary advertising budget on the basis of the average cost of buying a
gross rating point. To expose 1 percent of the target population to one impression costs an
average of $3,277. Therefore, 3,200 gross rating points will cost $10,486,400 (= $3,277 ×
3,200) in the introductory year.

The objective-and-task method has the advantage of requiring management to spell out its assumptions about the relationship among dollars spent, exposure levels, trial rates, and regular usage.

COMMUNICATION BUDGET TRADE-OFFS A major question is how much weight
marketing communications should receive in relationship to alternatives such as product
improvement, lower prices, or better service. The answer depends on where the company’s
products are in their life cycles, whether they are commodities or highly differentiable products,
whether they are routinely needed or must be “sold,” and other considerations. Marketing
communications budgets tend to be higher when there is low channel support, much change in the
marketing program over time, many hard-to-reach customers, more complex customer decision
making, differentiated products and nonhomogeneous customer needs, and frequent product
purchases in small quantities.33
In theory, marketers should establish the total communications budget so the marginal profit
from the last communication dollar just equals the marginal profit from the last dollar in the best
noncommunication use. Implementing this principle, however, is not easy.

Deciding on the Marketing
Communications Mix
Companies must allocate the marketing communications budget over the eight major modes of communication—advertising, sales promotion, public relations and publicity, events and experiences,
direct marketing, interactive marketing, word-of-mouth marketing, and the sales force. Within the
same industry, companies can differ considerably in their media and channel choices. Avon concentrates its promotional funds on personal selling, whereas Revlon spends heavily on advertising.
Electrolux spent heavily on a door-to-door sales force for years, whereas Hoover has relied more on
advertising.
Table 17.2 breaks down spending on some major forms of communication.
Companies are always searching for ways to gain efficiency by substituting one communications
tool for others. Many are replacing some field sales activity with ads, direct mail, and telemarketing.
One auto dealer dismissed his five salespeople and cut prices, and sales exploded. The substitutability among communications tools explains why marketing functions need to be coordinated.

Characteristics of the Marketing Communications Mix
Each communication tool has its own unique characteristics and costs. We briefly review them here
and discuss them in more detail in Chapters 18 and 19.

ADVERTISING Advertising reaches geographically dispersed buyers. It can build up a long-term
image for a product (Coca-Cola ads) or trigger quick sales (a Macy’s ad for a weekend sale). Certain
forms of advertising such as TV can require a large budget, whereas other forms such as newspaper
do not. The mere presence of advertising might have an effect on sales: Consumers might believe a
heavily advertised brand must offer “good value.”34 Because of the many forms and uses of
advertising, it’s difficult to make generalizations about it.35 Yet a few observations are worthwhile:
1.

Pervasiveness—Advertising permits the seller to repeat a message many times. It also allows
the buyer to receive and compare the messages of various competitors. Large-scale advertising
says something positive about the seller’s size, power, and success.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 17.2

Advertising and Digital Marketing Communications
Forecast for 2010

Global Advertising Spend Projections

2009–2010 % Change

2010 $ (billions)

Cinema

2.0%

2.23

Internet

12.0%

60.35

Magazines

⫺4.0%

43.10

Newspapers

⫺4.0%
2.0%

97.85
29.61

⫺2.0%
2.0%

174.94

0.9%

441.19

Display Advertising

7%

8.40

Email Marketing

8%

1.36

Mobile Marketing

44%

0.56

Search Marketing

15%

17.80

Social Media

31%

0.94

Total

13%

29.01

Outdoor
Radio
Television
Total

33.10

Source: ZenithOptimedia, December 2009.

Digital Marketing Communications

Source: Data from Figure 4 in US Interactive Marketing Forecast 2009 to 2014. Forester Reseach, Inc. July, 2009.
Source: Table from Piet Levy, “The Oscar-Contending Drama: Finding the Right Marketing Mix,” Marketing News, January 30, 2009, p. 15.

2.
3.

Amplified expressiveness—Advertising provides opportunities for dramatizing the company
and its brands and products through the artful use of print, sound, and color.
Control—The advertiser can choose the aspects of the brand and product on which to focus
communications.

SALES PROMOTION Companies use sales promotion tools—coupons, contests, premiums,
and the like—to draw a stronger and quicker buyer response, including short-run effects such as
highlighting product offers and boosting sagging sales. Sales promotion tools offer three
distinctive benefits:
1.
2.
3.

Ability to be attention-getting—They draw attention and may lead the consumer to the product.
Incentive—They incorporate some concession, inducement, or contribution that gives value
to the consumer.
Invitation—They include a distinct invitation to engage in the transaction now.

PUBLIC RELATIONS AND PUBLICITY Marketers tend to underuse public relations, yet a
well-thought-out program coordinated with the other communications-mix elements can be
extremely effective, especially if a company needs to challenge consumers’ misconceptions. The
appeal of public relations and publicity is based on three distinctive qualities:
1.
2.
3.

High credibility—News stories and features are more authentic and credible to readers than ads.
Ability to reach hard-to-find buyers—Public relations can reach prospects who prefer to
avoid mass media and targeted promotions.
Dramatization—Public relations can tell the story behind a company, brand, or product.

| CHAPTER 17

491

492

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

EVENTS AND EXPERIENCES There are many advantages to events and experiences as long
as they have the following characteristics:
1.
2.
3.

Relevant—A well-chosen event or experience can be seen as highly relevant because the
consumer is often personally invested in the outcome.
Engaging—Given their live, real-time quality, events and experiences are more actively engaging for consumers.
Implicit—Events are typically an indirect “soft sell.”

DIRECT AND INTERACTIVE MARKETING Direct and interactive marketing messages
take many forms—over the phone, online, or in person. They share three characteristics:
1.
2.
3.

Customized—The message can be prepared to appeal to the addressed individual.
Up-to-date—A message can be prepared very quickly.
Interactive—The message can be changed depending on the person’s response.

WORD-OF-MOUTH MARKETING Word of mouth also takes many forms both online or
offline. Three noteworthy characteristics are:
1.
2.
3.

Influential—Because people trust others they know and respect, word of mouth can be highly
influential.
Personal—Word of mouth can be a very intimate dialogue that reflects personal facts, opinions,
and experiences.
Timely—Word of mouth occurs when people want it to and are most interested, and it often
follows noteworthy or meaningful events or experiences.

PERSONAL SELLING Personal selling is the most effective tool at later stages of the buying
process, particularly in building up buyer preference, conviction, and action. Personal selling has
three notable qualities:
1.
2.
3.

Personal interaction—Personal selling creates an immediate and interactive episode between
two or more persons. Each is able to observe the other’s reactions.
Cultivation—Personal selling also permits all kinds of relationships to spring up, ranging
from a matter-of-fact selling relationship to a deep personal friendship.
Response—The buyer is often given personal choices and encouraged to directly respond.

Factors in Setting the Marketing Communications Mix
Companies must consider several factors in developing their communications mix: type of product
market, consumer readiness to make a purchase, and stage in the product life cycle.

TYPE OF PRODUCT MARKET Communications-mix allocations vary between consumer
and business markets. Consumer marketers tend to spend comparatively more on sales promotion
and advertising; business marketers tend to spend comparatively more on personal selling. In
general, personal selling is used more with complex, expensive, and risky goods and in markets
with fewer and larger sellers (hence, business markets).
Although marketers rely more on sales calls in business markets, advertising still plays a significant role:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Advertising can provide an introduction to the company and its products.
If the product has new features, advertising can explain them.
Reminder advertising is more economical than sales calls.
Advertisements offering brochures and carrying the company’s phone number or Web address
are an effective way to generate leads for sales representatives.
Sales representatives can use copies of the company’s ads to legitimize their company and products.
Advertising can remind customers how to use the product and reassure them about their purchase.

Advertising combined with personal selling can increase sales over personal selling alone.
Corporate advertising can improve a company’s reputation and improve the sales force’s chances of
getting a favorable first hearing and early adoption of the product.36 IBM’s corporate marketing
effort is a notable success in recent years.37

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 17

493

IBM Smarter Planet

Working with long-time ad agency Ogilvy & Mather,
IBM launched “Smarter Planet” in 2008 as a business strategy and multiplatform communications
program to promote the way in which IBM technology and expertise helps industry, government,
transportation, energy, education, health care, cities, and other businesses work better and
“smarter.” The point was that technology has evolved so far that many of the world’s problems are
now fixable. Emphasizing the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and China, the campaign began internally to inform and inspire IBM employees about how they could contribute to building a “Smarter Planet.” An
unconventional “Mandate for Change” series offered long-form, content-rich print ads in the business world’s
top newspapers outlining how IBM would address 25 key issues to make the
world work better. Targeted TV ads and detailed online interactive ads provided more support and substance. A “Smarter Cities” tour hosted major
events at which IBM and other experts discussed and debated challenges all
cities face: transportation, energy, health care, education, and public safety.
The success of the overall “Smarter Planet” campaign was evident in the significant improvements in IBM’s image as a company “making the world better” and “known for solving its clients’ most challenging problems.” Despite a
recession, significant increases occurred in new business opportunities and
the number of companies interested in doing business with IBM.
On the flip side, personal selling can also make a strong contribution in consumer-goods marketing. Some consumer marketers use
the sales force mainly to collect weekly orders from dealers and to see
that sufficient stock is on the shelf. Yet an effectively trained company sales force can make four important contributions:
1.
2.

3.
4.

Increase stock position. Sales reps can persuade dealers to take
more stock and devote more shelf space to the company’s brand.
Build enthusiasm. Sales reps can build dealer enthusiasm by
dramatizing planned advertising and communications support
for the company’s brand.
Conduct missionary selling. Sales reps can sign up more
dealers.
Manage key accounts. Sales reps can take responsibility for
growing business with the most important accounts.

BUYER-READINESS STAGE Communication tools vary in costeffectiveness at different stages of buyer readiness.
Figure 17.4
shows the relative cost-effectiveness of three communication tools.
Advertising and publicity play the most important roles in the
awareness-building stage. Customer comprehension is primarily
affected by advertising and personal selling. Customer conviction is
influenced mostly by personal selling. Closing the sale is influenced
mostly by personal selling and sales promotion. Reordering is also
affected mostly by personal selling and sales promotion, and
somewhat by reminder advertising.
PRODUCT LIFE-CYCLE STAGE In the introduction stage of
the product life cycle, advertising, events and experiences, and
publicity have the highest cost-effectiveness, followed by personal
selling to gain distribution coverage and sales promotion and direct
marketing to induce trial. In the growth stage, demand has its own
momentum through word of mouth and interactive marketing. Advertising, events and experiences,
and personal selling all become more important in the maturity stage. In the decline stage, sales
promotion continues strong, other communication tools are reduced, and salespeople give the
product only minimal attention.

IBM’s “Smarter Planet” corporate
brand campaign, which has met
with great success, sometimes
breaks the rules, as with this
text-heavy print ad.

494

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

|Fig. 17.4|
Cost Effectiveness

Cost-Effectiveness of
Three Different
Communication Tools
at Different BuyerReadiness Stages

Awareness

Comprehension

Conviction

Order

Reorder

Stages of Buyer Readiness
Advertising and publicity

Sales promotion

Personal selling

Measuring Communication Results
Senior managers want to know the outcomes and revenues resulting from their communications investments. Too often, however, their communications directors supply only inputs and expenses: press clipping counts, numbers of ads placed, media costs. In fairness, communications directors try to translate
inputs into intermediate outputs such as reach and frequency (the percentage of target market exposed
to a communication and the number of exposures), recall and recognition scores, persuasion changes,
and cost-per-thousand calculations. Ultimately, behavior-change measures capture the real payoff.
After implementing the communications plan, the communications director must measure its
impact. Members of the target audience are asked whether they recognize or recall the message,
how many times they saw it, what points they recall, how they felt about the message, and what are
their previous and current attitudes toward the product and the company. The communicator
should also collect behavioral measures of audience response, such as how many people bought the
product, liked it, and talked to others about it.
Figure 17.5 provides an example of good feedback measurement. We find 80 percent of the
consumers in the total market are aware of brand A, 60 percent have tried it, and only 20 percent
who tried it are satisfied. This indicates that the communications program is effective in creating
awareness, but the product fails to meet consumer expectations. In contrast, 40 percent of the
consumers in the total market are aware of brand B and only 30 percent have tried it, but 80 percent
of them are satisfied. In this case, the communications program needs to be strengthened to take
advantage of the brand’s potential power.

Managing the Integrated Marketing
Communications Process
Many companies still rely on only one or two communication tools. This practice persists in spite
of the fragmenting of mass markets into a multitude of minimarkets, each requiring its own approach; the proliferation of new types of media; and the growing sophistication of consumers. The
Brand B

Brand A

|Fig. 17.5|

20%
not aware

Current Consumer
States for Two Brands
100%
market

40%
did not
try
80%
aware
60%
tried

20%
satisfied

60% not
aware
80%
satisfied

100%
market

80%
disappointed

40%
aware

70% did
not try

20%
disappointed

30% tried
Total

Awareness

Brand
Trial

Satisfaction

Total

Awareness

Brand
Trial

Satisfaction

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 17

495

wide range of communication tools, messages, and audiences makes it imperative that companies
move toward integrated marketing communications. Companies must adopt a “360-degree view”
of consumers to fully understand all the different ways that communications can affect consumer
behavior in their daily lives.38
The American Marketing Association defines integrated marketing communications (IMC) as “a
planning process designed to assure that all brand contacts received by a customer or prospect for a product, service, or organization are relevant to that person and consistent over time.” This planning process
evaluates the strategic roles of a variety of communications disciplines—for example, general advertising, direct response, sales promotion, and public relations—and skillfully combines these disciplines to
provide clarity, consistency, and maximum impact through the seamless integration of messages.
Media companies and ad agencies are expanding their capabilities to offer multiplatform deals
for marketers. These expanded capabilities make it easier for marketers to assemble various media
properties—as well as related marketing services—in an integrated communication program.
Table 17.3 displays the different lines of businesses for marketing and advertising services giant WPP.

Coordinating Media
Media coordination can occur across and within media types, but marketers should combine
personal and nonpersonal communications channels through multiple-vehicle, multiple-stage
campaigns to achieve maximum impact and increase message reach and impact.
Promotions can be more effective when combined with advertising, for example.39 The awareness and attitudes created by advertising campaigns can increase the success of more direct sales

TABLE 17.3

WPP’s Lines of Businesses

Advertising
Global, national and specialist advertising services from a range of top international and specialist agencies, amongst them Grey, JWT, Ogilvy &
Mather, United Network and Y&R
Media Investment Management
Above- and below-the-line media planning and buying and specialist sponsorship and branded entertainment services from GroupM companies
MediaCom, Mediaedge:cia, Mindshare, Maxus and others
Consumer Insight
WPP’s Kantar companies, including TNS, Millward Brown, The Futures Company and many other specialists in brand, consumer, media and
marketplace insight, work with clients to generate and apply great insights
Public Relations & Public Affairs
Corporate, consumer, financial and brand-building services from PR and lobbying firms Burson-Marsteller, Cohn & Wolfe, Hill & Knowlton,
Ogilvy Public Relations Worldwide and others
Branding & Identity
Consumer, corporate and employee branding and design services, covering identity, packaging, literature, events, training and architecture
from Addison, The Brand Union, Fitch, Lambie-Nairn, Landor Associates, The Partners and others
Direct, Promotion & Relationship Marketing
The full range of general and specialist customer, channel, direct, field, retail, promotional and point-of-sale services from Bridge Worldwide,
G2, OgilvyOne, OgilvyAction, RTC Relationship Marketing, VML, Wunderman and others.
Healthcare Communications
CommonHealth, GCI Health, ghg, Ogilvy Healthworld, Sudler & Hennessey and others provide integrated healthcare marketing solutions from
advertising to medical education and online marketing
Specialist Communications
A comprehensive range of specialist services, from custom media and multicultural marketing to event, sports, youth and entertainment
marketing; corporate and business-to-business; media, technology and production services
WPP Digital
Through WPP Digital, WPP companies and their clients have access to a portfolio of digital experts including 24/7 Real Media, Schematic and BLUE
Source: Adapted from WPP, “What We Do,” www.wpp.com/wpp/about/whatwedo/ (as at 1 October 2010). Used with permission.

496

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

pitches. Advertising can convey the positioning of a brand and benefit from online display advertising or search engine marketing that offers a stronger call to action.40
Many companies are coordinating their online and offline communications activities. Web
addresses in ads (especially print ads) and on packages allow people to more fully explore a company’s products, find store locations, and get more product or service information. Even if consumers don’t order online, marketers can use Web sites in ways that drive them into stores to buy.

Implementing IMC
In recent years, large ad agencies have substantially improved their integrated offerings. To facilitate
one-stop shopping, these agencies have acquired promotion agencies, public relations firms, packagedesign consultancies, Web site developers, and direct-mail houses. They are redefining themselves as
communications companies that assist clients to improve their overall communications effectiveness
by offering strategic and practical advice on many forms of communication.41 Many international
clients such as IBM (Ogilvy), Colgate (Young & Rubicam), and GE (BBDO) have opted to put a substantial portion of their communications work through one full-service agency. The result is integrated and more effective marketing communications at a much lower total communications cost.
Integrated marketing communications can produce stronger message consistency and help
build brand equity and create greater sales impact.42 It forces management to think about every
way the customer comes in contact with the company, how the company communicates its positioning, the relative importance of each vehicle, and timing issues. It gives someone the responsibility—
where none existed before—to unify the company’s brand images and messages as they come
through thousands of company activities. IMC should improve the company’s ability to reach the
right customers with the right messages at the right time and in the right place.43 “Marketing
Memo: How Integrated Is Your IMC Program?” provides some guidelines.

marketing

Memo

How Integrated Is Your IMC Program?

In assessing the collective impact of an IMC program, the marketer’s overriding goal is to create the most effective and efficient communications
program possible. The following six criteria can help determine whether
communications are truly integrated.

• Coverage. Coverage is the proportion of the audience reached by
each communication option employed, as well as how much overlap
exists among communication options. In other words, to what extent
do different communication options reach the designated target
market and the same or different consumers making up that market?

• Contribution. Contribution is the inherent ability of a marketing
communication to create the desired response and communication
effects from consumers in the absence of exposure to any other
communication option. How much does a communication affect
consumer processing and build awareness, enhance image, elicit
responses, and induce sales?

• Commonality. Commonality is the extent to which common associations are reinforced across communication options; that is, the extent to
which information conveyed by different communication options share
meaning. The consistency and cohesiveness of the brand image is
important because it determines how easily existing associations and
responses can be recalled and how easily additional associations and
responses can become linked to the brand in memory.

• Complementarity. Communication options are often more effective when
used in tandem. Complementarity relates to the extent to which different
associations and linkages are emphasized across communication options.
Different brand associations may be most effectively established by capitalizing on those marketing communication options best suited to eliciting
a particular consumer response or establishing a particular type of brand
association. Many of the TV ads during the Super Bowl—America’s
biggest media event—are designed to create curiosity and interest so that
consumers go online and engage in social media and word of mouth to
experience and find more detailed information.44 A 2010 Super Bowl spot
for Snickers candy bar featuring legendary TV comedienne Betty White
resulted in over 3.5 million visits to the brand’s Web site after it was run.

• Versatility. In any integrated communication program, when consumers
are exposed to a particular marketing communication, some will have
already been exposed to other marketing communications for the brand,
and some will not have had any prior exposure. Versatility refers to the
extent to which a marketing communication option is robust and “works”
for different groups of consumers.The ability of a marketing communication
to work at two levels—effectively communicating to consumers who have
or have not seen other communications—is critically important.

• Cost. Marketers must weigh evaluations of marketing communications
on all these criteria against their cost to arrive at the most effective and
efficient communications program.

Source: Adapted from Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008).

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 17

497

Summary
1. Modern marketing calls for more than developing a
good product, pricing it attractively, and making it
accessible to target customers. Companies must also
communicate with present and potential stakeholders
and with the general public.
2. The marketing communications mix consists of eight
major modes of communication: advertising, sales
promotion, public relations and publicity, events and
experiences, direct marketing, interactive marketing,
word-of-mouth marketing, and personal selling.
3. The communications process consists of nine elements:
sender, receiver, message, media, encoding, decoding,
response, feedback, and noise. To get their messages
through, marketers must encode their messages in a
way that takes into account how the target audience
usually decodes messages. They must also transmit
the message through efficient media that reach the
target audience and develop feedback channels to
monitor response to the message.
4. Developing effective communications requires eight
steps: (1) Identify the target audience, (2) determine the
communications objectives, (3) design the communications, (4) select the communications channels, (5) establish the total communications budget, (6) decide on
the communications mix, (7) measure the communications results, and (8) manage the integrated marketing
communications process.
5. In identifying the target audience, the marketer needs to
close any gap that exists between current public perception and the image sought. Communications objectives can be to create category need, brand awareness,
brand attitude, or brand purchase intention.

6. Designing the communication requires solving three
problems: what to say (message strategy), how to say it
(creative strategy), and who should say it (message
source). Communications channels can be personal
(advocate, expert, and social channels) or nonpersonal
(media, atmospheres, and events).
7. Although other methods exist, the objective-and-task
method of setting the communications budget, which
calls upon marketers to develop their budgets by defining
specific objectives, is typically most desirable.
8. In choosing the marketing communications mix, marketers must examine the distinct advantages and costs
of each communication tool and the company’s market
rank. They must also consider the type of product
market in which they are selling, how ready consumers
are to make a purchase, and the product’s stage in the
company, brand, and product.
9. Measuring the effectiveness of the marketing communications mix requires asking members of the target
audience whether they recognize or recall the communication, how many times they saw it, what points they
recall, how they felt about the communication, and
what are their previous and current attitudes toward the
company, brand, and product.
10. Managing and coordinating the entire communications
process calls for integrated marketing communications
(IMC): marketing communications planning that recognizes the added value of a comprehensive plan to evaluate the strategic roles of a variety of communications
disciplines, and that combines these disciplines to
provide clarity, consistency, and maximum impact
through the seamless integration of discrete messages.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Has TV Advertising Lost Its Power?

Take a position: TV advertising has faded in importance versus TV advertising is still the most powerful
advertising medium.

Long deemed the most successful marketing medium, television advertising is increasingly criticized for being too expensive and, even worse, no longer as effective as it once
was. Critics maintain that consumers tune out too many ads
by zipping and zapping and that it is difficult to make a
strong impression. The future, claim some, is with online
advertising. Supporters of TV advertising disagree, contending that the multisensory impact of TV is unsurpassed and
that no other media option offers the same potential impact.

Marketing Discussion
Communications Audit
Pick a brand and go to its Web site. Locate as many forms
of communication as you can find. Conduct an informal
communications audit. What do you notice? How consistent are the different communications?

498

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Marketing Excellence

>>Red Bull

Red Bull’s
integrated marketing communications mix has been so successful that the company has
created an entirely new drink category—functional energy drinks—and has become a multibillion-dollar brand
among competition from beverage kings like Coca-Cola
and Pepsi. In less than 20 years, Red Bull has become
the energy drink market leader by skillfully connecting
with the global youth. Dietrich Mateschitz founded Red
Bull in Austria and introduced the energy drink into
Hungary, its first foreign market, in 1992. Today, Red
Bull sells 4 billion cans of energy drinks each year in
over 160 countries.
So how does Red Bull do it? The answer: differently
than others. For years, Red Bull offered just one product,
Red Bull Energy Drink, in one size—a slick silver 250 ml.
(8.3 oz.) can with a European look and feel. Red Bull’s
ingredients—amino acid taurine, B-complex vitamins,
caffeine, and carbohydrates—mean it’s highly caffeinated
and energizing, so fans have called it “liquid cocaine” and
“speed in a can.” Over the last decade, Red Bull has introduced three additional products: Red Bull Sugarfree, Red
Bull Energy Shots, and Red Bull Cola—each slight variations of the original energy drink.
Since its beginning, Red Bull has used little traditional
advertising and no print, billboards, banner ads, or Super
Bowl spots. While the company runs minimal television
commercials, the animated spots and tagline “Red Bull
Gives You Wiiings” are meant to amuse its young audience and connect in a nontraditional, nonpushy manner.
Red Bull builds buzz about the product through
grassroots, viral marketing tactics, starting with its “seeding program” that microtargets trendy shops, clubs, bars,
and stores. As one Red Bull executive explained, “We go
to on-premise accounts first, because the product gets a
lot of visibility and attention. It goes faster to deal with
individual accounts, not big chains and their authorization

process.” Red Bull is easily accepted at clubs because “in
clubs, people are open to new things.”
Once Red Bull has gained some momentum in the
bars, it next moves into convenience stores located near
colleges, gyms, health-food stores, and supermarkets,
prime locations for its target audience of men and women
aged 16 to 29. Red Bull has also been known to target
college students directly by providing them with free
cases of Red Bull and encouraging them to throw a party.
Eventually, Red Bull moves into restaurants and finally,
into supermarkets.
Red Bull’s marketing efforts strive to build its brand
image of authenticity, originality, and community in several
ways. First, Red Bull targets opinion leaders by sampling
its product, a lot. Free Red Bull energy drinks are available
at sports competitions, in limos before award shows, and
at exclusive after-parties. Free samples are passed out on
college campuses and city streets, given to those who
look like they need a lift.
Next, Red Bull aligns itself with a wide variety of extreme sports, athletes, teams, events, and artists (in
music, dance, and film). From motor sports to mountain
biking, snowboarding to surfing, dancing to extreme
sailing, there is no limit to the craziness of a Red Bull
event or sponsorship. A few have become notorious for
taking originality and extreme sporting to the limit, including the annual Flugtag. At Flugtag, contestants
build homemade flying machines that must weigh less
than 450 pounds, including the pilot. Teams then launch
their contraptions off a specially designed Red Bull
branded ramp, 30 feet above a body of water. Crowds
of up to 300,000 young consumers cheer on as the
contestants and their “planes” stay true to the brand’s
slogan: “Red Bull gives you wings!”
Another annual event, the Red Bull Air Race, tests the
limits of sanity. Twelve of the world’s top aerobatic stunt
pilots compete in a 3.5 mile course through a low-level
aerial racetrack made up of air-filled Red Bull branded pylons 33 feet apart and reaching 65 feet in height. In other
words, pilots fly planes with a 26-foot wingspan through a
gap of 33 feet at 230 mph. These Red Bull–branded
planes crash occasionally, but to date no fatalities have
ever occurred.
Red Bull’s Web site provides consumers with information about how to find Red Bull events, videos of and
interviews with Red Bull–sponsored athletes, and clips of
amazing feats that will be tested next. For example, Bull
Stratos is a mission one man is undertaking to free-fall
from 120,000 feet, or 23 miles high. The jump will be attempted from the edge of space and, if successful, it will
mark the first time a human being has reached supersonic
speeds in a free fall.
Red Bull buys traditional advertising once the
market is mature and the company needs to reinforce

DESIGNING AND MANAGING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS

the brand to its consumers. As one Red Bull executive
explained, “Media is not a tool that we use to establish the market. It is a critical part. It’s just later in the
development.”
Red Bull’s “anti-marketing” IMC strategy has been
extremely successful connecting with its young consumers. It falls directly in line with the company’s mission
to be seen as unique, original, and rebellious—just as its
Generation Y consumers want to be viewed.
Questions
1. What are Red Bull’s greatest strengths and risks as
more companies (like Coca-Cola, Pepsi, and Monster)

Marketing Excellence

>>Target

Like other discount retailers, Target sells a wide variety of
products, including clothing, jewelry, sporting goods,
household supplies, toys, electronics, and health and
beauty products. However, since its founding in 1962,
Target has focused on differentiating itself from the competition. This became evident in the mid-1980s when
Kmart dominated the mass retail industry and Walmart
was growing rapidly. Kmart and Walmart’s marketing
messages communicated their low price promise, but
their merchandise was perceived as cheap and lowquality. Target sensed a gap in the market for “cheap chic”
retail and set out to distinguish itself from the other bigbox retailers.
Target planned to build an up-market cachet for its
brand without losing its relevance for price-conscious
consumers. It positioned itself as a high-fashion brand
with trendy styles and quality merchandise at affordable
low prices. To fulfill this brand promise, Target’s teams of
merchandisers travel the world looking for the next hot
items. Next, Target brings these trends to the shelves
faster than its competitors.
Many styles are sold exclusively at Target through
partnerships with world-renowned designers, such as
Mossimo Giannulli, Jean Paul Gaultier, and Liz Lange in
clothes; Anya Hindmarch in handbags; Sigerson Morrison

| CHAPTER 17

499

enter the energy drink category and gain market
share?
2. Should Red Bull do more traditional advertising? Why
or why not?
3. Discuss the effectiveness of Red Bull’s sponsorships,
for example, Bull Stratos. Is this a good use of Red
Bull’s marketing budget? Where should the company
draw the line?
Sources: Kevin Lane Keller, “Red Bull: Managing a High-Growth Brand,” Best Practice Cases in
Branding, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008); Peter Ha, “Red Bull Stratos: Man
Will Freefall from Earth’s Stratosphere,” Time, January 22, 2010; Red Bull, www.redbull.com.

in shoes; Michael Graves in home goods; and Pixi by
Petra Strand in beauty. They are either staples in Target
stores or part of the Go International line, a special design
collection available for only a few months. In 2006, Target
introduced U.S. consumers to the concept of “fast fashion,” already popular in Europe, to help keep the product
selection fresh, which in turn led to more frequent shopper visits.
Target’s designer line collections are just one unique
part of its entire integrated marketing communications
mix. The company uses a variety of tactics to communicate its “cheap chic” positioning, beginning with its slogan, “Expect More, Pay Less.” In its stores, Target uses
strategically placed low shelves, halogen and track lighting, cleaner fixtures, and wider aisles to avoid visual
clutter. Signage features contemporary imagery but is
printed on less expensive materials. Target even catches
the eye of consumers in the air by painting its signature
red bull’s eye on the roof of stores located near busy
airports.
Target uses a wide range of traditional advertising
such as television ads, direct mailers, print ads, radio, and
circulars. Its messages feature hip young customers, a
variety of strong name-brand products, and a lighthearted
tone—all which have helped make Target’s bull’s eye logo
well recognized. Target also aligns itself with a variety of
events, sports, athletes, and museums through corporate
sponsorships. From Target Field, the home of the
Minnesota Twins in Minneapolis, to Target NASCAR and
Indy racing teams and contemporary athletes like Olympic
snowboarder Shaun White, sponsorships help Target
pinpoint specific consumers, interests, attitudes, and
demographics. Target also advertises on and sponsors
major awards shows such as the Oscars, Emmys,
Grammys, and the Golden Globes.
Target has a strong online presence and uses
Target.com as a critical component in its retail and

500

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

communications strategy. Target.com is able to gain insight into consumers’ shopping preferences, which ultimately allows for more targeted direct marketing efforts.
The site also features in-store items alongside Web-only
items in hopes of driving traffic into the stores. On social
Web sites such as Twitter and Facebook, Target builds
loyalty and encourages young consumers to share their
experiences, discounts, and great finds with each other.
Target reinforces its positive brand image by contributing significantly to surrounding communities. The company donates 5 percent of its annual income, or more than
$3 million a week, to programs that focus on education,
the arts, social service, and volunteerism. Target donated
more than 16 million pounds of food in 2008 to Feed
America, the nation’s food bank network. Target also
sponsors discounted or free days at art museums around
the country, including the Museum of Modern Art in New
York and the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago.
As a result of its integrated marketing plan, Target has
attracted many shoppers who would not otherwise shop
at a discount retailer. Its customers are younger, more
affluent, and more educated than its competitors attract.
The median age of Target shoppers is 41 and the median
household income is $63,000. Three-quarters of Target
consumers are female and 45 percent have children at
home. In addition, 97 percent of U.S. consumers recognize the Target bull’s eye logo.
While Target’s marketing communication mix has
effectively communicated its “cheap chic” message over
the years, this strategy hurt sales during the recession in
2008–2009. During that time, consumers significantly cut
their spending and shopped mostly for necessities at lowcost Walmart instead of for discretionary items, which
make up about three-fifths of sales at Target.

As a result, Target tweaked its marketing message
and merchandise profile. The company added perishables to its inventory—a necessity in slow economic
times—and cut back on discretionary items such as
clothing and home accessories. Target’s marketing message remains focused on offering consumers high style
and unique brand names but emphasizes value more,
using phrases such as “fresh for less” and “new way
to save.”
Today, Target is the second-largest discount retailer in
the United States, with $65.4 billion in sales in 2009, and
ranks number 28 on the Fortune 500 list. Its successful integrated marketing mix has worked so well that consumers often jokingly pronounce the company’s name as
if it were an upscale boutique, “Tar-ZHAY.”
Questions
1. What has Target done well over the years in terms of
its integrated marketing communications strategy?
What should it do going forward?
2. How does Target compete against mammoth
Walmart? What are the distinct differences in their
IMC strategies?
3. Did Target do the right thing by tweaking its message
to focus more on value and less on trends? Why or
why not?
Sources: “Value for Money Is Back—Target Does Marketing Right,” The Marketing Doctor,
October 2, 2006; Ben Steverman, “Target vs. Wal-Mart: The Next Phase,” BusinessWeek, August
18, 2009; Ann Zimmerman, “Staying on Target,” Wall Street Journal, May 7, 2007; Mya Frazier,
“The Latest European Import: Fast Fashion,” Advertising Age, January 9, 2006, p. 6; Julie
Schlosser, “How Target Does It,” Fortune, October 18, 2004, p. 100; Michelle Conlin, “Look Who’s
Stalking Wal-Mart,” BusinessWeek, December 7, 2009, pp. 30–36; Wikinvest, www.wikinvest.com;
Target, www.target.com.

This page intentionally left blank

502

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

r
e
t
ap
h
C

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What steps are required in developing an advertising program?
2. How should sales promotion
decisions be made?
3. What are the guidelines for
effective brand-building events
and experiences?
4. How can companies exploit the
potential of public relations and
publicity?

Old Spice has put more than a little
swagger in its products—and in its
advertising—to modernize the
decades-old brand.

18

Managing Mass
Communications: Advertising,
Sales Promotions, Events
and Experiences,
and Public Relations
Although there has been an enormous increase in the use of personal
communications by marketers in recent years, due to the rapid penetration of the Internet and
other factors, the fact remains that mass media, if used correctly, is still an important component of
a modern marketing communications program. The old days of “if you build a great ad, they will
come,” however, are long gone. To generate consumer interest and sales, mass media must often
be supplemented and carefully integrated with other communications, as was the case with
Procter & Gamble’s Old Spice.1

Among the more successful of the 30-second ads estimated to cost over $2.5 million to
run during the broadcast of the 2010 Super Bowl was one for Old Spice body wash.
Turning a potential negative of being an old brand into a positive of being experienced, Old
Spice has made a remarkable transformation in recent years from “your father’s
aftershave” to a contemporary men’s fragrance brand. In a new strategic move, given their
important role in the purchase process, the Super Bowl spot targeted women as well as
men. The tongue-in-cheek ad featured rugged ex-NFL football player Isaiah Mustafa as “The Man Your
Man Could Smell Like.” In one seamless take, Mustafa confidently strikes a variety of romantic poses
while passing from a shower in a bathroom to standing on a boat to riding a white horse. Uploaded onto
YouTube and other social networking sites, the ad was viewed over 10 million additional times. Old
Spice’s Facebook page included a Web application called “My Perpetual
Love,” which featured Mustafa offering men the opportunity to be “more
Although Old Spice clearly has found great success with
like him” by e-mailing and tweeting their sweethearts virtual love notes. its ad campaign, other marketers are trying to come to grips with
For its efforts, the ad agency behind the campaign, Wieden+Kennedy, how to best use mass media in the new—and still changing—
received a Grand Prix at the Cannes International Ad festival. A follow-up communication environment.2 In this chapter, we examine the
ad in June 2010 showed Mustafa in a new series of “perfect man” nature and use of four mass-communication tools—advertising,
activities including baking birthday cakes, building a home with his own sales promotion, events and experiences, and public relations and
publicity.
hands, swan-diving into a hot tub, and, yes, walking on water.

503

504

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Developing and Managing
an Advertising Program
Advertising can be a cost-effective way to disseminate messages, whether to build a brand preference or to educate people. Even in today’s challenging media environment, good ads can pay off.
P&G has also enjoyed double-digit sales gains in recent years from ads touting the efficacy of Olay
Definity antiaging skin products and Head & Shoulders Intensive Treatment shampoo.3
In developing an advertising program, marketing managers must always start by identifying the
target market and buyer motives. Then they can make the five major decisions, known as “the five
Ms”: Mission: What are our advertising objectives? Money: How much can we spend and how do we
allocate our spending across media types? Message: What message should we send? Media: What
media should we use? Measurement: How should we evaluate the results? These decisions are
summarized in
Figure 18.1 and described in the following sections.

Setting the Objectives
The advertising objectives must flow from prior decisions on target market, brand positioning, and
the marketing program.
An advertising objective (or goal) is a specific communications task and achievement level to
be accomplished with a specific audience in a specific period of time:4
To increase among 30 million homemakers who own automatic washers the number who
identify brand X as a low-sudsing detergent, and who are persuaded that it gets clothes
cleaner, from 10 percent to 40 percent in one year.
We can classify advertising objectives according to whether their aim is to inform, persuade, remind, or reinforce. These objectives correspond to different stages in the hierarchy-of-effects model
discussed in Chapter 17.
•

Informative advertising aims to create brand awareness and knowledge of new products or
new features of existing products.5 To promote its OnStar in-vehicle safety, security, and information service that uses wireless and GPS satellite technology, GM launched the “Real Stories”
campaign in 2002. The award-winning TV, radio, and print ad campaign used actual subscriber stories in their own words and voices to share the importance and benefits of OnStar
through life-changing experiences. By 2005, the OnStar brand had reached 100 percent awareness among consumers shopping for a new vehicle.6

Message

Money
Mission
Sales goals
Advertising objectives

Factors to consider:
Stage in PLC
Market share and
consumer base
Competition and clutter
Advertising frequency
Product substitutability

|Fig. 18.1|

The Five Ms of Advertising

Message generation
Message evaluation
and selection
Message execution
Social-responsibility
review

Measurement

Media

Communication impact
Sales impact

Reach, frequency, impact
Major media types
Specific media vehicles
Media timing
Geographical media
allocation

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

•

•

•

Persuasive advertising aims to create liking, preference, conviction, and purchase of a product
or service. Some persuasive advertising uses comparative advertising, which makes an explicit
comparison of the attributes of two or more brands. Miller Lite took market share from Bud
Lite by pointing out that Bud Lite had higher carbs. Comparative advertising works best when
it elicits cognitive and affective motivations simultaneously, and when consumers are processing advertising in a detailed, analytical mode.7
Reminder advertising aims to stimulate repeat purchase of products and services.
Expensive, four-color Coca-Cola ads in magazines are intended to remind people to purchase Coca-Cola.
Reinforcement advertising aims to convince current purchasers that they made the right
choice. Automobile ads often depict satisfied customers enjoying special features of their new car.

The advertising objective should emerge from a thorough analysis of the current marketing situation. If the product class is mature, the company is the market leader, and brand usage is low, the
objective is to stimulate more usage. If the product class is new, the company is not the market
leader, but the brand is superior to the leader, then the objective is to convince the market of the
brand’s superiority.

Deciding on the Advertising Budget
How does a company know it’s spending the right amount? Although advertising is treated as a
current expense, part of it is really an investment in building brand equity and customer loyalty.
When a company spends $5 million on capital equipment, it may treat the equipment as a five-year
depreciable asset and write off only one-fifth of the cost in the first year. When it spends $5 million
on advertising to launch a new product, it must write off the entire cost in the first year, reducing its
reported profit, even if the effects will persist for many years to come.

FACTORS AFFECTING BUDGET DECISIONS Here are five specific factors to consider
when setting the advertising budget:8
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

Stage in the product life cycle—New products typically merit large advertising budgets to
build awareness and to gain consumer trial. Established brands usually are supported with
lower advertising budgets, measured as a ratio to sales.
Market share and consumer base—High-market-share brands usually require less advertising
expenditure as a percentage of sales to maintain share. To build share by increasing market size
requires larger expenditures.
Competition and clutter—In a market with a large number of competitors and high advertising spending, a brand must advertise more heavily to be heard. Even simple clutter from
advertisements not directly competitive to the brand creates a need for heavier advertising.
Advertising frequency—The number of repetitions needed to put the brand’s message across
to consumers has an obvious impact on the advertising budget.
Product substitutability—Brands in less-differentiated or commodity-like product classes
(beer, soft drinks, banks, and airlines) require heavy advertising to establish a unique
image.

ADVERTISING ELASTICITY The predominant response function for advertising is
often concave but can be S-shaped. When consumer response is S-shaped, some positive
amount of advertising is necessary to generate any sales impact, but sales increases
eventually flatten out. 9
One classic study found that increasing the TV advertising budget had a measurable effect on
sales only half the time. The success rate was higher for new products or line extensions than for
established brands, and when there were changes in copy or in media strategy (such as an expanded
target market). When advertising increased sales, its impact lasted up to two years after peak spending. Moreover, the long-term incremental sales generated were approximately double the incremental sales observed in the first year of an advertising spending increase.10
Other studies reinforce these conclusions. In a 2004 IRI study of 23 brands, advertising often
didn’t increase sales for mature brands or categories in decline. A review of academic research
found that advertising elasticities were estimated to be higher for new (.3) than for established
products (.1).11

| CHAPTER 18

505

506

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Developing the Advertising Campaign
In designing and evaluating an ad campaign, marketers employ both art and science to develop the
message strategy or positioning of an ad—what the ad attempts to convey about the brand—and its
creative strategy—how the ad expresses the brand claims. Advertisers go through three steps: message
generation and evaluation, creative development and execution, and social-responsibility review.

MESSAGE GENERATION AND EVALUATION Many of today’s automobile ads look
similar—a car drives at high speed on a curved mountain road or across a desert. Advertisers are always
seeking “the big idea”that connects with consumers rationally and emotionally, sharply distinguishes the
brand from competitors, and is broad and flexible enough to translate to different media, markets, and
time periods.12 Fresh insights are important for avoiding using the same appeals and position as others.

Got Milk?

After a 20-year decline in milk consumption among Californians, in 1993
milk processors from across the state formed the California Milk Processor Board (CMPB) with one
goal in mind: to get people to drink more milk. The ad agency commissioned by the CMPB, Goodby,
Silverstein & Partners, developed a novel approach to pitching milk’s benefits. Research had
shown that most consumers already believed milk was good for them. So the campaign would
remind consumers of the inconvenience and annoyance of running out of milk when they went
to eat certain foods, which became known as “milk deprivation.” The “got milk?” tagline reminded consumers to make sure they had milk in their refrigerators. A year after the launch,
sales volume had increased 1.07 percent. In 1995, the “got milk?” campaign was licensed to
the National Dairy Board. In 1998, the National Fluid Milk Processor Education Program, which
had been using the “milk mustache” campaign since 1994 to boost sales, bought the rights to
the “got milk?” tagline. The “got milk?” campaign continues to pay strong dividends by halting
the decline in sales of milk in California more than 13 years after its launch.13
A good ad normally focuses on one or two core selling propositions. As part of refining the brand positioning, the advertiser should conduct market research to determine
which appeal works best with its target audience and then prepare a creative brief, typically one or two pages. This is an elaboration of the positioning statement and includes
considerations such as key message, target audience, communications objectives (to do,
to know, to believe), key brand benefits, supports for the brand promise, and media.
How many alternative ad themes should the advertiser create before making a
choice? The more ad themes explored, the higher the probability of finding an excellent one. Fortunately, an ad agency’s creative department can inexpensively compose
many alternative ads in a short time by drawing still and video images from computer
files. Marketers can also cut the cost of creative dramatically by using consumers as
their creative team, a strategy sometimes called “open source” or “crowdsourcing.”14
The tagline for California Milk
Processor Board’s “Got milk?”
campaign has also been used as
part of the “milk mustache” print
ad series, featuring numerous
celebrities such as St. Louis
Cardinals baseball slugger
Albert Pujols.

Consumer-Generated Advertising

One of the first major
marketers to feature consumer-generated ads was Converse, whose award-winning campaign,
“Brand Democracy,” used films created by consumers in a series of TV and Web ads. Some of
the most popular ads during recent Super Bowl broadcasts have been homemade contest winners for Frito-Lay’s Doritos tortilla chips. H. J. Heinz ran a “Top This TV Challenge” inviting the
public to create the next commercial for its Heinz Ketchup brand and win $57,000. More than 6,000 submissions and more than 10 million online views resulted, and sales rose over 13 percent year over year. In addition to creating ads, consumers can help disseminate advertising. A UK “Life’s for Sharing” ad for T-Mobile in
which 400 people break into a choreographed dance routine in the Liverpool Street Station was shown exactly once on the Celebrity Big Brother television show, but it was watched more than 15 million times online
when word about it spread via e-mail messages, blogs, and social networks.
Although entrusting consumers with a brand’s marketing effort can be pure genius, it can also
be a regrettable failure. When Kraft sought a hip name for a new flavor variety of its iconic Vegemite

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 18

507

T-Mobile’s highly entertaining
“Life’s for Sharing” subway dance
became an online viral marketing
sensation.

product in Australia, it labeled the first 3 million jars “Name Me” to enlist consumer support. From
48,000 entries, however, the marketer selected one that was thrown in as a joke—iSnack 2.0—and
sales plummeted. The company had to pull iSnack jars from the shelves and start from scratch in a
more conventional fashion, yielding the new name Cheesybite.15

CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT AND EXECUTION The ad’s impact depends not only on
what it says, but often more important, on how it says it. Execution can be decisive. Every
advertising medium has advantages and disadvantages. Here, we briefly review television, print,
and radio advertising media.

Sony

Television Ads Television is generally acknowledged as the most powerful advertising medium
and reaches a broad spectrum of consumers at low cost per exposure. TV advertising has two
particularly important strengths. First, it can vividly demonstrate product attributes and
persuasively explain their corresponding consumer benefits. Second, it can dramatically portray
user and usage imagery, brand personality, and other intangibles.
Because of the fleeting nature of the ad, however, and the distracting creative elements often
found in it, product-related messages and the brand itself can be overlooked. Moreover, the high
volume of nonprogramming material on television creates clutter that makes it easy for consumers
to ignore or forget ads. Nevertheless, properly designed and executed TV ads can still be a powerful
marketing tool and improve brand equity and affect sales and profits. In the highly competitive
insurance category, advertising can help a brand to stand out.16

Aflac Aflac, the largest supplier of supplemental insurance, was relatively unknown

until a highly creative ad campaign made it one of the most recognized brands in recent history. (Aflac stands for American Family Life Assurance Company.) Created by the Kaplan
Thaler ad agency, the lighthearted campaign features an irascible duck incessantly squawking
the company’s name, “Aflac!” while consumers or celebrities discuss its products. The duck’s
frustrated bid for attention appealed to consumers. Sales were up 28 percent in the first year the duck
aired, and name recognition went from 13 percent to 91 percent. Aflac has stuck with the duck in its
advertising, even incorporating it into its corporate logo in 2005. Social media have allowed marketers to
further develop the personality of the duck—it has 170,000 Facebook fans and counting! The Aflac duck
is not just a U.S. phenomenon. It also stars in Japanese TV ads—with a somewhat brighter disposition—
where it has been credited with helping to drive sales in Aflac’s biggest market.

Print Ads Print media offer a stark contrast to broadcast media. Because readers consume them at
their own pace, magazines and newspapers can provide detailed product information and effectively

508

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Aflac’s iconic duck character has
been the centerpiece of its brandbuilding advertising for years.

communicate user and usage imagery. At the same time, the static nature of the visual images in print
media makes dynamic presentations or demonstrations difficult, and print media can be fairly passive.
The two main print media—magazines and newspapers—share many advantages and disadvantages. Although newspapers are timely and pervasive, magazines are typically more effective at
building user and usage imagery. Newspapers are popular for local—especially retailer—advertising.
On an average day, roughly one-half to three-quarters of U.S. adults read a newspaper, although
increasingly that is an online version. Print newspaper circulation fell almost 9 percent in 2009.17
Although advertisers have some flexibility in designing and placing newspaper ads, relatively poor
reproduction quality and short shelf life can diminish the ads’ impact.
Researchers studying print advertisements report that the picture, headline, and copy matter in
that order. The picture must be strong enough to draw attention. The headline must reinforce the
picture and lead the person to read the copy. The copy must be engaging and the brand’s name
sufficiently prominent. Even then, less than 50 percent of the exposed audience will notice even a
really outstanding ad. About 30 percent might recall the headline’s main point, about 25 percent
register the advertiser’s name, and fewer than 10 percent will read most of the body copy. Ordinary
ads don’t achieve even these results.
Given how consumers process print ads, some clear managerial implications emerge, as summarized in “Marketing Memo: Print Ad Evaluation Criteria.” One print ad campaign that successfully
carved out a brand image is Absolut vodka.18

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 18

509

marketing

Memo

Print Ad Evaluation Criteria

In judging the effectiveness of a print ad, in addition to considering the communication strategy (target market, communications objectives, and message and creative strategy), marketers should be able to answer yes to the
following questions about the ad’s execution:

3. Does the illustration support the headline?

1. Is the message clear at a glance? Can you quickly tell what the advertisement is all about?

6. Is the product easily identified?

4. Does the first line of the copy support or explain the headline and illustration?
5. Is the ad easy to read and follow?
7. Is the brand or sponsor clearly identified?

2. Is the benefit in the headline?

Absolut Vodka

Source: Adapted from Scott C. Purvis and Philip Ward Burton, Which Ad Pulled Best, 9th ed. (Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books, 2002).

Absolut Vodka

Vodka is generally viewed as a commodity product, yet the
amount of brand preference and loyalty in the vodka market is astonishing and attributed mostly
to brand image. When the Swedish brand Absolut entered the U.S. market in 1979, the company
sold a disappointing 7,000 cases. By 1991, sales had soared to over 2 million cases. Absolut became the largest-selling imported vodka in the United States, with 65 percent of the market,
thanks in large part to its marketing and advertising strategies aimed at sophisticated, upwardly mobile, affluent drinkers. The vodka comes in a distinctive clear bottle that served as the centerpiece of 15,000 ad executions over a 25-year period. The campaign cleverly juxtaposed a punning caption against a stylized image of the
bottle—for example, “Absolut Texas” under an image of an oversized bottle, or “Absolut 19th” with a bottle
made of a golf green. But feeling that consumers were beginning to tune out the message, in 2007 Absolut introduced a new global campaign that showed what things would be like “In an Absolut World.” In this fantasy
world, men get pregnant, soap bubbles flow from smokestacks, masterpiece paintings hang in Times Square,
protesters and police fight with feather pillows, and perhaps most fantastically of all, the Cubs win the World
Series. The revitalized campaign led to a 9 percent increase in case sales before the recession hit in 2008.

Radio Ads Radio is a pervasive medium: Ninety-three percent of all U.S. citizens age 12 and older

Motel 6

listen to the radio daily and for around 20 hours a week on average, numbers that have held steady
in recent years. Much radio listening occurs in the car and out of home. As streaming Internet
access gains ground, traditional AM/FM radio stations are feeling the pressure and account for less
than half of all listening at home.19
Perhaps radio’s main advantage is flexibility—stations are very targeted, ads are relatively
inexpensive to produce and place, and short closings allow for quick response. Radio is a particularly
effective medium in the morning; it can also let companies achieve a balance between broad and
localized market coverage.
The obvious disadvantages of radio are its lack of visual images and the relatively passive nature
of the consumer processing that results. Nevertheless, radio ads can be extremely creative. Some see
the lack of visual images as a plus because they feel the clever use of music, sound, and other creative devices can tap into the listener’s imagination to create powerfully relevant and liked images.
Here is an example:20

Motel 6 Motel 6, the nation’s largest budget motel chain, was founded in 1962 when
the “6” stood for $6 a night. After its business fortunes hit bottom in 1986 with an occupancy
rate of only 66.7 percent, Motel 6 made a number of marketing changes, including the launch of
humorous 60-second radio ads featuring folksy contractor-turned-writer Tom Bodett delivering
the clever tagline, “We’ll Leave the Light on for You.” Named one of the Top 100 Ad Campaigns

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

of the Twentieth Century by leading trade publication Advertising Age, the Motel 6 campaign continues to receive awards, including the 2009 Radio Mercury Awards grand prize for an ad called “DVD.” In this ad, Bodett
introduces the “DVD version” of his latest commercial, utilizing his trademark self-deprecating style to provide
“behind the scenes” commentary on his own performance. Still going strong, the ad campaign is credited
with a rise in occupancy and a revitalization of the brand that continues to this day.

LEGAL AND SOCIAL ISSUES To break through clutter, some advertisers believe they have to
be edgy and push the boundaries of what consumers are used to seeing in advertising. In doing so,
marketers must be sure advertising does not overstep social and legal norms21 or offend the general
public, ethnic groups, racial minorities, or special-interest groups.
A substantial body of laws and regulations governs advertising. Under U.S. law, advertisers must
not make false claims, such as stating that a product cures something when it does not. They must
avoid false demonstrations, such as using sand-covered Plexiglas instead of sandpaper to demonstrate that a razor blade can shave sandpaper. It is illegal in the United States to create ads that have
the capacity to deceive, even though no one may actually be deceived. A floor wax advertiser can’t
say the product gives six months’ protection unless it does so under typical conditions, and the
maker of a diet bread can’t say it has fewer calories simply because its slices are thinner. The challenge is telling the difference between deception and “puffery”—simple exaggerations that are not
meant to be believed and that are permitted by law.
Splenda versus
Equal

510

Splenda versus Equal

Splenda’s tagline for its artificial sweetener was
“Made from sugar, so it tastes like sugar,” with “but it’s not sugar” in small writing almost as an
afterthought. McNeil Nutritionals, Splenda’s manufacturer, does begin production of Splenda with
pure cane sugar but burns it off in the manufacturing process. However, Merisant, maker of
Equal, claimed that Splenda’s advertising confuses consumers who are likely to conclude that a
product “made from sugar” is healthier than one made from aspartame, Equal’s main ingredient. A document
used in court and taken from McNeil’s own files notes that consumers’ perception of Splenda as “not an artificial sweetener” was one of the biggest triumphs of the company’s marketing campaign, which began in
2003. Splenda became the runaway leader in the sugar-substitute category with 60 percent of the market,
leaving roughly 14 percent each to Equal (in the blue packets) and Sweet’N Low (pink packets). Although
McNeil eventually agreed to settle the lawsuit and pay Merisant an undisclosed but “substantial” award (and
change its advertising), it may have been too late for consumers to change their perception of Splenda as
something sugary and sugar-free.22
Sellers in the United States are legally obligated to avoid bait-and-switch advertising that attracts
buyers under false pretenses. Suppose a seller advertises a sewing machine at $149. When consumers try to buy the advertised machine, the seller cannot then refuse to sell it, downplay its features, show a faulty one, or promise unreasonable delivery dates in order to switch the buyer to a
more expensive machine.23
Advertising can play a more positive broader social role. The Ad Council is a nonprofit organization that uses top-notch industry talent to produce and distribute public service announcements
for nonprofits and government agencies. From its early origins with “Buy War Bonds” posters, the
Ad Council has tackled innumerable pressing social issues through the years. One of its recent efforts featured beloved Sesame Street stars Elmo and Gordon exhorting children to wash their hands
in the face of the H1N1 flu virus.24

Deciding on Media and
Measuring Effectiveness
After choosing the message, the advertiser’s next task is to choose media to carry it. The steps here
are deciding on desired reach, frequency, and impact; choosing among major media types; selecting
specific media vehicles; deciding on media timing; and deciding on geographical media allocation.
Then the marketer evaluates the results of these decisions.

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 18

511

Deciding on Reach, Frequency, and Impact
Media selection is finding the most cost-effective media to deliver the desired number and type of
exposures to the target audience. What do we mean by the desired number of exposures? The advertiser seeks a specified advertising objective and response from the target audience—for example,
a target level of product trial. This level depends on, among other things, level of brand awareness.
Suppose the rate of product trial increases at a diminishing rate with the level of audience awareness, as shown in
Figure 18.2(a). If the advertiser seeks a product trial rate of T *, it will be
necessary to achieve a brand awareness level of A*.
The next task is to find out how many exposures, E *, will produce a level of audience awareness
of A*. The effect of exposures on audience awareness depends on the exposures’ reach, frequency,
and impact:
•
•
•

Reach (R). The number of different persons or households exposed to a particular media
schedule at least once during a specified time period
Frequency (F). The number of times within the specified time period that an average person
or household is exposed to the message
Impact (I). The qualitative value of an exposure through a given medium (thus a food ad will
have a higher impact in Bon Appetit than in Fortune magazine)

Figure 18.2(b) shows the relationship between audience awareness and reach. Audience awareness
will be greater, the higher the exposures’ reach, frequency, and impact. There are important trade-offs
here. Suppose the planner has an advertising budget of $1,000,000 and the cost per thousand exposures
of average quality is $5. This means 200,000,000 exposures ($1,000,000 ÷ [$5/1,000]). If the advertiser
seeks an average exposure frequency of 10, it can reach 20,000,000 people (200,000,000 ÷ 10) with the
given budget. But if the advertiser wants higher-quality media costing $10 per thousand exposures, it
will be able to reach only 10,000,000 people unless it is willing to lower the desired exposure frequency.
The relationship between reach, frequency, and impact is captured in the following concepts:
•

•

Total number of exposures (E). This is the reach times the average frequency; that is, E = R × F,
also called the gross rating points (GRP). If a given media schedule reaches 80 percent of homes
with an average exposure frequency of 3, the media schedule has a GRP of 240 (80 × 3). If another media schedule has a GRP of 300, it has more weight, but we cannot tell how this weight
breaks down into reach and frequency.
Weighted number of exposures (WE). This is the reach times average frequency times average
impact, that is WE = R × F × I.

Reach is most important when launching new products, flanker brands, extensions of wellknown brands, or infrequently purchased brands; or when going after an undefined target market.
Frequency is most important where there are strong competitors, a complex story to tell, high consumer resistance, or a frequent-purchase cycle.25
A key reason for repetition is forgetting. The higher the forgetting rate associated with a brand,
product category, or message, the higher the warranted level of repetition. However, advertisers
should not coast on a tired ad but insist on fresh executions by their ad agency.26 GEICO has found
advertising success by keeping both its campaigns and their executions fresh.
(b) Relationship between Audience
Awareness Level and Exposure
Reach and Frequency

Frequency = 5,
Impact = 1.5

Trial

Awareness

(a) Relationship between Product
Trial Rate and Audience
Awareness Level

T*

Frequency = 5,
Impact = 1
Frequency = 3,
Impact = 1

A*

A*

E*
Awareness

Reach

|Fig. 18.2|

Relationship Among
Trial, Awareness, and
the Exposure
Function

512

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

GEICO

Have the hundreds of millions of dollars GEICO has spent on TV advertising been worth it? Warren Buffet, chairman and CEO of GEICO’s parent company Berkshire
Hathaway, sure thinks so. He told shareholders he would spend millions on GEICO advertising! GEICO has more than quadrupled its revenue over the last decade, from slightly under
$3 billion in 1998 to more than $13 billion in 2009—
making it the fastest-growing auto insurance company
in the United States. The company eschews agents to
sell directly to consumers with a basic message, “15
Minutes Could Save You 15% or More on Your Car
Insurance.” Partnering with The Martin Agency, GEICO
has run different award-winning TV campaigns to emphasize different benefits of the brand. Popular TV
spots advertising GEICO’s claim that its Web site is “So
Easy, a Caveman Can Use It” featured offended
Neanderthals expressing indignation at the prejudice
they face. TV ads featuring the Cockney-speaking
Gecko lizard spokes-character reinforce GEICO’s brand
image as credible and accomplished. A third campaign, themed “Rhetorical Questions,” uses cultural
icons and touch points to make it seem obvious that
GEICO saves customers money by asking self-evident
questions such as, “Does Elmer Fudd have trouble
with the letter R?” and “Did the Waltons take way too
long to say goodnight?” The multiple campaigns complement each other and build on each other’s success; the company dominates the TV airwaves with so
many varied car insurance messages that any competitors’ ads are lost.27

Choosing Among Major
Media Types
The media planner must know the capacity of the
major advertising media types to deliver reach, frequency, and impact. The major advertising media
along with their costs, advantages, and limitations
are profiled in
Table 18.1. Media planners make
their choices by considering factors such as target
audience media habits, product characteristics, message requirements, and cost.
One of the most active advertisers
around, GEICO employs multiple
ad campaigns, including a series
featuring the gecko lizard.

Alternate Advertising Options
In recent years, reduced effectiveness of traditional mass media has led advertisers to increase their
emphasis on alternate advertising media.

PLACE ADVERTISING Place advertising, or out-of-home advertising, is a broad category
including many creative and unexpected forms to grab consumers’ attention. The rationale is that
marketers are better off reaching people where they work, play, and, of course, shop. Popular
options include billboards, public spaces, product placement, and point of purchase.
Billboards Billboards have been transformed and now use colorful, digitally produced graphics,
backlighting, sounds, movement, and unusual—even 3D—images.28 In New York, manhole covers

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 18.1

| CHAPTER 18

513

Profiles of Major Media Types

Medium

Advantages

Limitations

Newspapers

Flexibility; timeliness; good local market coverage; broad
acceptance; high believability

Short life; poor reproduction quality; small “pass-along”
audience

Television

Combines sight, sound, and motion; appealing to the senses; high
attention; high reach

High absolute cost; high clutter; fleeting exposure; less
audience selectivity

Direct mail

Audience selectivity; flexibility; no ad competition within the same
medium; personalization

Relatively high cost; “junk mail” image

Radio

Mass use; high geographic and demographic selectivity;
low cost

Audio presentation only; lower attention than television;
nonstandardized rate structures; fleeting exposure

Magazines

High geographic and demographic selectivity; credibility and
prestige; high-quality reproduction; long life; good pass-along
readership

Long ad purchase lead time; some waste in
circulation

Outdoor

Flexibility; high repeat exposure; low cost; low competition

Limited audience selectivity; creative limitations

Yellow Pages

Excellent local coverage; high believability; wide reach;
low cost

High competition; long ad purchase lead time; creative
limitations

Newsletters

Very high selectivity; full control; interactive opportunities; relative
low costs

Costs could run away

Brochures

Flexibility; full control; can dramatize messages

Overproduction could lead to runaway costs

Telephone

Many users; opportunity to give a personal touch

Relative high cost; increasing consumer resistance

Internet

High selectivity; interactive possibilities; relatively low cost

Increasing clutter

have been reimagined as steaming cups of Folgers coffee; in Belgium, eBay posted “Moved to eBay”
stickers on empty storefronts; and in Germany, imaginary workers toiling inside vending machines,
ATMs, and photo booths were justification for a German job-hunting Web site to proclaim, “Life Is
Too Short for the Wrong Job.”29
New “Eyes On” measurement techniques allow marketers to better understand who actually has
seen their outdoor ads.30 The right billboard can make all the difference. Chang Soda in Bangkok
had enough money in its budget for only one digital billboard. To maximize impact, it built a giant
bubbling bottle onto the billboard to illustrate the product’s carbonation. Subsequent word-ofmouth buzz quintupled bottle sales from 200,000 to 1 million.31
A strong creative message can also break through visual clutter. Snickers out-of-home program
used billboards and taxi-top signs with puns combining the brand’s benefits and key locations,
such as “Satisflying” at the airport, “Transfer to the Ate Train” in the subway, and “Snackonomics”
on cabs in Wall Street.32

Public Spaces Advertisers have been increasingly placing ads in unconventional places such as on
movie screens, on airplanes, and in fitness clubs, as well as in classrooms, sports arenas, office and
hotel elevators, and other public places.33 Billboard-type poster ads are showing up everywhere.
Transit ads on buses, subways, and commuter trains—around for years—have become a valuable
way to reach working women. “Street furniture”—bus shelters, kiosks, and public areas—is another
fast-growing option.
Advertisers can buy space in stadiums and arenas and on garbage cans, bicycle racks, parking
meters, airport luggage carousels, elevators, gasoline pumps, the bottom of golf cups and swimming pools, airline snack packages, and supermarket produce in the form of tiny labels on apples
and bananas. They can even buy space in toilet stalls and above urinals which, according to one

514

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Snickers uses clever taxi-top signs
to increase its brand salience.

research study, office workers visit an average of three to four times a day for roughly four minutes per visit.34

Product Placement Marketers pay product placement fees of $100,000 to as much as

Staples and
The Office

$500,000 so their products will make cameo appearances in movies and on television. 35
Sometimes placements are the result of a larger network advertising deal, but other times they
are the work of small product-placement shops that maintain ties with prop masters, set
designers, and production executives. Some firms get product placement at no cost by
supplying their product to the movie company (Nike does not pay to be in movies but often
supplies shoes, jackets, bags, and so on). Increasingly, products and brands are being woven
directly into the story.36

Staples and The Office When Staples introduced a new $69.99 paper-

shredding device called the MailMate in 2006, the company struck a two-episode deal with
NBC’s popular television program, The Office. In the first episode, the character Kevin Malone
was given the responsibility of shredding paper with the MailMate; in the second, another character, Dwight Schrute, took a job at Staples. The writers and producers of the show tried to accommodate Staples’ marketing objectives for the product as much as possible. To make sure the shredder
looked small enough, it sat on Kevin’s desk. To emphasize the shredder was sturdy, Kevin shredded not only
paper but also his credit card. To emphasize that the shredder was available only at Staples, the episode
closed with Kevin shredding lettuce and making it into a salad. When a colleague asked where he got the
salad, he replied, “Staples.”
Product placement is not immune to criticism as lawmakers increasingly criticize its stealth nature, threatening to force more explicit disclosure of participating advertisers.

Point of Purchase Chapter 16 discussed the importance of shopper marketing and in-store
marketing efforts. The appeal of point-of-purchase advertising lies in the fact that in many product
categories consumers make the bulk of their final brand decisions in the store, 74 percent according
to one study.37
There are many ways to communicate with consumers at the point of purchase (P-O-P).
In-store advertising includes ads on shopping carts, cart straps, aisles, and shelves, as well as

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

Walmart
SMART
Network

promotion options such as in-store demonstrations, live sampling, and instant coupon
machines.38 Some supermarkets are selling floor space for company logos and experimenting
with talking shelves. P-O-P radio provides FM-style programming and commercial messages
to thousands of food stores and drugstores nationwide. Programming includes a store-selected
music format, consumer tips, and commercials. Video screens in some stores allow for
TV-type ads to be run.39

Walmart SMART Network One of the in-store advertising pio-

neers, Walmart, replaced its original Walmart TV with its new SMART network in 2008. The new
TV network allows Walmart to monitor and control more than 27,000 individual screens in some
2,700 stores nationwide, reaching 160 million viewers every four weeks. Its “triple play” feature
permits ads to be shown on a large welcome screen at the entrance of the store, a category
screen in departments, and endcap screens on each aisle. Those highly visible endcap viewings are not
cheap. Advertisers pay $325,000 for 30-second spots per two-week cycle in the grocery section and
$650,000 per four-week run in the health and beauty aid department. Five-second ads running every two
minutes for two weeks on the welcome screens cost advertisers $80,000, and 10-second spots running
twice every six minutes on the full network cost $50,000 per week. By linking the time when ads were shown
and when product sales were made, Walmart can estimate how much ads increase sales by department
(from 7 percent in Electronics to 28 percent in Health & Beauty) and by product type (mature items increase
by 7 percent, seasonal items by 18 percent).

McDonald’s
and The Lost
Ring

EVALUATING ALTERNATE MEDIA Ads now can appear virtually anywhere consumers
have a few spare minutes or even seconds to notice them. The main advantage of nontraditional
media is that they can often reach a very precise and captive audience in a cost-effective
manner. The message must be simple and direct. Outdoor advertising, for example, is often
called the “15-second sell.” It’s more effective at enhancing brand awareness or brand image
than creating new brand associations.
Unique ad placements designed to break through clutter may also be perceived as invasive and
obtrusive, however. Consumer backlash often results when people see ads in traditionally ad-free
spaces, such as in schools, on police cruisers, and in doctors’ waiting rooms. Nevertheless, perhaps
because of its sheer pervasiveness, some consumers seem to be less bothered by nontraditional media now than in the past.
The challenge for nontraditional media is demonstrating its reach and effectiveness through
credible, independent research. Consumers must be favorably affected in some way to justify
the marketing expenditures. But there will always be room for creative means of placing the
brand in front of consumers, as occurred with McDonald’s’ alternate-reality game called “The
Lost Ring.”40 “Marketing Insight: Playing Games with Brands” describes the role of gaming in
marketing in general.

McDonald’s and The Lost Ring

As an official sponsor of
the 2008 Beijing Olympics, McDonald’s created a multipronged marketing effort. Looking to
engage young adults immune to traditional media ploys, McDonald’s, its marketing agency
AKQA, and game developer Jane McGonigal created a global, multilingual alternate-reality
game (ARG) called The Lost Ring. The Web-based game centered around Ariadne, a fictional amnesiac female Olympic athlete from a parallel universe, and united players around the world in
an online quest to recover ancient Olympic secrets. Discreetly sponsored by McDonald’s, the game
began with 50 gaming bloggers receiving enigmatic packages on February 29, 2008 (Leap Day). The
packages included an Olympic-themed poster from 1920 and other teasers with a clue to
TheLostRing.com. Almost 3 million people in more than 100 countries eventually played the game,
which ended August 24, 2008, the last day of the Olympics. The game received the Grand Prize in
Adweek’s 2008 Buzz Awards.

| CHAPTER 18

515

516

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Marketing Insight
Playing Games with Brands
More than half of U.S. adults age 18 and older play video games, and about
one in five play every day or almost every day. Virtually all teens (97 percent)
play video games. As many as 40 percent of gamers are women. Women
seem to prefer puzzles and collaborative games, whereas men seem more
attracted to competitive or simulation games. Given this explosive popularity,
many advertisers have decided, “if you can’t beat them, join them.”
A top-notch “advergame” can cost between $100,000 and
$500,000 to develop. The game can be played on the sponsor’s corporate homepage, on gaming portals, or even on public locations such as
at restaurants. 7-Up, McDonald’s, and Porsche have all been featured in
games. Honda developed a game that allowed players to choose a
Honda and zoom around city streets plastered with Honda logos. In the

first three months, 78,000 people played for an average of eight minutes each. The game’s cost per thousand (CPM) of $7 compared favorably to a prime-time TV commercial’s CPM of $11.65. Marketers collect
valuable customer data upon registration and often seek permission to
send e-mail. Of game players sponsored by Ford Escape SUV, 54 percent signed up to receive e-mail.
Marketers are also playing starring roles in popular video games. In
multiplayer Test Drive Unlimited, players can take a break from the races
to go shopping, where they can encounter at least 10 real-world brands
such as Lexus and Hawaiian Airlines. Tomb Raider’s Lara Craft tools
around in a Jeep Commander. Mainstream marketers such as Apple,
Procter & Gamble, Toyota, and Visa are all jumping on board. Overall, research suggests that gamers are fine with ads and the way they affect
the game experience. One study showed that 70 percent of gamers felt
dynamic in-game ads “contributed to realism,” “fit the games” in which
they served, and looked “cool.”
Sources: “In-Game Advertising Research Proves Effectiveness for Brands across
Categories and Game Titles,” www.microsoft.com, June 3, 2008; Amanda Lenhart,
“Video Games: Adults Are Players Too,” Pew Internet & American Life Project,
www.pewresearch.org, December 7, 2008; “Erika Brown, “Game On!” Forbes,
July 24, 2006, pp. 84–86; David Radd, “Advergaming: You Got It,” BusinessWeek,
October 11, 2006; Stuart Elliott, “Madison Avenue’s Full-Court Pitch to Video
Gamers,” New York Times, October 16, 2005.

Selecting Specific Media Vehicles
The media planner must search for the most cost-effective vehicles within each chosen media type.
The advertiser who decides to buy 30 seconds of advertising on network television can pay around
$100,000 for a new show, over $300,000 for a popular prime-time show such as Sunday Night
Football, American Idol, Grey’s Anatomy, or Desperate Housewives, or over $2.5 million for an event
such as the Super Bowl.41 These choices are critical: The average cost to produce a national 30-second
television commercial in 2007 was about $342,000.42 It can cost as much to run an ad once on
network TV as to create and produce the ad to start with!
In making choices, the planner must rely on measurement services that estimate audience size,
composition, and media cost. Media planners then calculate the cost per thousand persons reached
by a vehicle. A full-page, four-color ad in Sports Illustrated cost approximately $350,000 in 2010. If
Sports Illustrated’s estimated readership was 3.15 million people, the cost of exposing the ad to
1,000 persons is approximately $11.20. The same ad in Time cost approximately $500,000, but
reached 4.25 million people—at a higher cost-per-thousand of $11.90.
The media planner ranks each magazine by cost per thousand and favors magazines with the
lowest cost per thousand for reaching target consumers. The magazines themselves often put together a “reader profile” for their advertisers, describing average readers with respect to age, income, residence, marital status, and leisure activities.
Marketers need to apply several adjustments to the cost-per-thousand measure. First, they
should adjust for audience quality. For a baby lotion ad, a magazine read by 1 million young mothers has an exposure value of 1 million; if read by 1 million teenagers, it has an exposure value of almost zero. Second, adjust the exposure value for the audience-attention probability. Readers of
Vogue may pay more attention to ads than do readers of Newsweek.43 Third, adjust for the
medium’s editorial quality (prestige and believability). People are more likely to believe a TV or radio ad and to become more positively disposed toward the brand when the ad is placed within a
program they like.44 Fourth, consider ad placement policies and extra services (such as regional or
occupational editions and lead-time requirements for magazines).

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 18

Media planners are using more sophisticated measures of effectiveness and employing them
in mathematical models to arrive at the best media mix. Many advertising agencies use software
programs to select the initial media and make improvements based on subjective factors.45

Deciding on Media Timing and Allocation
In choosing media, the advertiser has both a macroscheduling and a microscheduling decision. The
macroscheduling decision relates to seasons and the business cycle. Suppose 70 percent of a product’s sales occur between June and September. The firm can vary its advertising expenditures to
follow the seasonal pattern, to oppose the seasonal pattern, or to be constant throughout the year.
The microscheduling decision calls for allocating advertising expenditures within a short period
to obtain maximum impact. Suppose the firm decides to buy 30 radio spots in the month of
September.
Figure 18.3 shows several possible patterns. The left side shows that advertising
messages for the month can be concentrated (“burst” advertising), dispersed continuously
throughout the month, or dispersed intermittently. The top side shows that the advertising messages can be beamed with a level, rising, falling, or alternating frequency.
The chosen pattern should meet the communications objectives set in relationship to the nature
of the product, target customers, distribution channels, and other marketing factors. The timing
pattern should consider three factors. Buyer turnover expresses the rate at which new buyers enter
the market; the higher this rate, the more continuous the advertising should be. Purchase frequency
is the number of times the average buyer buys the product during the period; the higher the purchase frequency, the more continuous the advertising should be. The forgetting rate is the rate at
which the buyer forgets the brand; the higher the forgetting rate, the more continuous the advertising should be.
In launching a new product, the advertiser must choose among continuity, concentration,
flighting, and pulsing.
•

•
•

•

Continuity means exposures appear evenly throughout a given period. Generally, advertisers
use continuous advertising in expanding market situations, with frequently purchased items,
and in tightly defined buyer categories.
Concentration calls for spending all the advertising dollars in a single period. This makes
sense for products with one selling season or related holiday.
Flighting calls for advertising during a period, followed by a period with no advertising,
followed by a second period of advertising activity. It is useful when funding is limited, the
purchase cycle is relatively infrequent, or items are seasonal.
Pulsing is continuous advertising at low-weight levels, reinforced periodically by waves of
heavier activity. It draws on the strength of continuous advertising and flights to create a compromise scheduling strategy.46 Those who favor pulsing believe the audience will learn the
message more thoroughly, and at a lower cost to the firm.
Level

Rising

Falling

Alternating

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

|Fig. 18.3|

Classification of
Advertising Timing
Patterns

Concentrated

Continuous

Number of
Messages
per Month

Intermittent

Month

517

518

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

TABLE 18.2

Advertising Pretest Research Techniques

For Print Ads
Starch and Gallup & Robinson Inc. are two widely used print pretesting services. Test ads are placed
in magazines, which are then circulated to consumers. These consumers are contacted later and
interviewed. Recall and recognition tests are used to determine advertising effectiveness.
For Broadcast Ads
In-home tests: A video is taken or downloaded into the homes of target
consumers, who then view the commercials.

Trailer tests: In a trailer in a shopping center, shoppers are shown the products and given an opportunity to select a series of brands. They then view commercials and are given coupons to be used in
the shopping center. Redemption rates indicate commercials’ influence on purchase behavior.
Theater tests: Consumers are invited to a theater to view a potential new television series along
with some commercials. Before the show begins, consumers indicate preferred brands in different
categories; after the viewing, consumers again choose preferred brands. Preference changes
measure the commercials’ persuasive power.
On-air tests: Respondents are recruited to watch a program on a regular TV channel during the test
commercial or are selected based on their having viewed the program. They are asked questions
about commercial recall.
A company must decide how to allocate its advertising budget over space as well as over time.
The company makes “national buys” when it places ads on national TV networks or in nationally
circulated magazines. It makes “spot buys” when it buys TV time in just a few markets or in regional
editions of magazines. These markets are called areas of dominant influence (ADIs) or designated
marketing areas (DMAs). The company makes “local buys” when it advertises in local newspapers,
radio, or outdoor sites.
Share of
expenditures

Evaluating Advertising Effectiveness
Most advertisers try to measure the communication effect of an ad—that is, its potential impact on
awareness, knowledge, or preference. They would also like to measure the ad’s sales effect.

COMMUNICATION-EFFECT RESEARCH Communication-effect research, called copy

Share of
market

testing, seeks to determine whether an ad is communicating effectively. Marketers should perform
this test both before an ad is put into media and after it is printed or broadcast.
Table 18.2
describes some specific advertising pretest research techniques.
Pretest critics maintain that agencies can design ads that test well but may not necessarily
perform well in the marketplace. Proponents maintain that useful diagnostic information
can emerge and that pretests should not be used as the sole decision criterion anyway.
Widely acknowledged as one of the best advertisers around, Nike is notorious for doing very
little ad pretesting.
Many advertisers use posttests to assess the overall impact of a completed campaign. If a company hoped to increase brand awareness from 20 percent to 50 percent and succeeded in increasing
it to only 30 percent, then the company is not spending enough, its ads are poor, or it has overlooked some other factor.

Formula for
Measuring Different
Stages in the Sales
Impact of Advertising

SALES-EFFECT RESEARCH What sales are generated by an ad that increases brand awareness
by 20 percent and brand preference by 10 percent? The fewer or more controllable other factors
such as features and price are, the easier it is to measure advertising’s effect on sales. The sales
impact is easiest to measure in direct marketing situations and hardest in brand or corporate
image-building advertising.
Companies are generally interested in finding out whether they are overspending or underspending on advertising. One way to answer this question is to work with the formulation shown in
Figure 18.4.

Share of
voice

Share of
mind and
heart

|Fig. 18.4|

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

A company’s share of advertising expenditures produces a share of voice (proportion of company
advertising of that product to all advertising of that product) that earns a share of consumers’ minds
and hearts and, ultimately, a share of market.
Researchers try to measure the sales impact by analyzing historical or experimental data. The
historical approach correlates past sales to past advertising expenditures using advanced statistical
techniques.47 Other researchers use an experimental design to measure advertising’s sales impact.
A growing number of researchers are striving to measure the sales effect of advertising expenditures instead of settling for communication-effect measures.48 Millward Brown International has
conducted tracking studies for years to help advertisers decide whether their advertising is benefiting their brand.49

Sales Promotion
Sales promotion, a key ingredient in marketing campaigns, consists of a collection of incentive
tools, mostly short term, designed to stimulate quicker or greater purchase of particular products
or services by consumers or the trade.50
Whereas advertising offers a reason to buy, sales promotion offers an incentive. Sales promotion
includes tools for consumer promotion (samples, coupons, cash refund offers, prices off, premiums,
prizes, patronage rewards, free trials, warranties, tie-in promotions, cross-promotions, point-ofpurchase displays, and demonstrations), trade promotion (prices off, advertising and display allowances, and free goods), and business and sales force promotion (trade shows and conventions,
contests for sales reps, and specialty advertising).

Objectives
Sales promotion tools vary in their specific objectives. A free sample stimulates consumer trial, whereas
a free management-advisory service aims at cementing a long-term relationship with a retailer.
Sellers use incentive-type promotions to attract new triers, to reward loyal customers, and to increase the repurchase rates of occasional users. Sales promotions often attract brand switchers, who
are primarily looking for low price, good value, or premiums. If some of them would not have otherwise tried the brand, promotion can yield long-term increases in market share.51
Sales promotions in markets of high brand similarity can produce a high sales response in the
short run but little permanent gain in brand preference over the longer term. In markets of high
brand dissimilarity, they may be able to alter market shares permanently. In addition to brand
switching, consumers may engage in stockpiling—purchasing earlier than usual (purchase acceleration) or purchasing extra quantities. But sales may then hit a postpromotion dip.52

Advertising versus Promotion
Sales promotion expenditures increased as a percentage of budget expenditure for a number of
years, although its growth has recently slowed. Several factors contributed to this growth, particularly in consumer markets. Promotion became more accepted by top management as an effective
sales tool, the number of brands increased, competitors used promotions frequently, many brands
were seen as similar, consumers became more price-oriented, the trade demanded more deals from
manufacturers, and advertising efficiency declined.
But the rapid growth of sales promotion created clutter. Consumers began to tune out promotions: Coupon redemption peaked in 1992 at 7.9 billion coupons redeemed but dropped to 2.6 billion
by 2008. Incessant price reductions, coupons, deals, and premiums can also devalue the product in
buyers’ minds. There is a risk in putting a well-known brand on promotion over 30 percent of the
time. Having turned to 0 percent financing, hefty cash rebates, and special lease programs to ignite
sales in the soft post-9/11 economy, auto manufacturers have found it difficult to wean consumers
from discounts ever since.53
Loyal brand buyers tend not to change their buying patterns as a result of competitive promotions. Advertising appears to be more effective at deepening brand loyalty, although we can
distinguish added-value promotions from price promotions.54 Gain’s “Love at First Sniff ” campaign used direct mail and in-store scented tear-pads and ShelfVision TV to entice consumers
to smell the product, resulting in an almost 500 percent increase in shipments over the goal.55

| CHAPTER 18

519

520

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Price promotions may not build permanent total-category volume. One study of more than
1,000 promotions concluded that only 16 percent paid off.56 Small-share competitors may find it
advantageous to use sales promotion, because they cannot afford to match the market leaders’ large
advertising budgets, nor can they obtain shelf space without offering trade allowances or stimulate
consumer trial without offering incentives. Dominant brands offer deals less frequently, because
most deals subsidize only current users.
The upshot is that many consumer-packaged-goods companies feel forced to use more sales
promotion than they wish. They blame heavy use of sales promotion for decreased brand loyalty,
increased price sensitivity, brand-quality image dilution, and a focus on short-run marketing planning. One review of promotion effectiveness concluded, “When the strategic disadvantages of promotions are included, that is, losing control to the trade and training consumers to buy only on
deal, the case is compelling for a reevaluation of current practices and the incentive systems responsible for this trend.”57

Major Decisions
In using sales promotion, a company must establish its objectives, select the tools, develop the program, pretest the program, implement and control it, and evaluate the results.

ESTABLISHING OBJECTIVES Sales promotion objectives derive from broader communication
objectives, which derive from more basic marketing objectives for the product. For consumers,
objectives include encouraging purchase of larger-sized units, building trial among nonusers, and
attracting switchers away from competitors’ brands. Ideally, promotions with consumers would have
short-run sales impact as well as long-run brand equity effects.58 For retailers, objectives include
persuading retailers to carry new items and higher levels of inventory, encouraging off-season buying,
encouraging stocking of related items, offsetting competitive promotions, building brand loyalty, and
gaining entry into new retail outlets. For the sales force, objectives include encouraging support of a
new product or model, encouraging more prospecting, and stimulating off-season sales.59
SELECTING CONSUMER PROMOTION TOOLS The promotion planner should take
into account the type of market, sales promotion objectives, competitive conditions, and each tool’s
cost-effectiveness. The main consumer promotion tools are summarized in
Table 18.3.
Manufacturer promotions are, for instance in the auto industry, rebates, gifts to motivate test-drives
and purchases, and high-value trade-in credit. Retailer promotions include price cuts, feature
advertising, retailer coupons, and retailer contests or premiums.60
We can also distinguish between sales promotion tools that are consumer franchise building and those
that are not. The former impart a selling message along with the deal, such as free samples, frequency
awards, coupons when they include a selling message, and premiums when they are related to the product. Sales promotion tools that typically are not brand building include price-off packs, consumer premiums not related to a product, contests and sweepstakes, consumer refund offers, and trade allowances.
Consumer franchise-building promotions offer the best of both worlds—they build brand equity
while moving product. Sampling has gained popularity in recent years—companies such as
McDonald’s, Dunkin’ Donuts, and Starbucks have given away millions of samples of their new products—because consumers like them and they often lead to higher long-term sales for quality products.61
Digital coupons eliminate printing costs, reduce paper waste, are easily updatable, and have
higher redemption rates. Coupons.com receives almost 5 million unique visitors a month for
money-saving deals. Almost 2 million consumers visit CoolSavings.com each month for
money-saving coupons and offers from name brands, as well as helpful tips and articles,
newsletters, free recipes, sweepstakes, free trials, free samples, and more. Electronic coupons can
arrive by cell phone, Twitter, e-mail, or Facebook.62
SELECTING TRADE PROMOTION TOOLS Manufacturers use a number of trade
promotion tools (see
Table 18.4).63 Manufacturers award money to the trade (1) to persuade
the retailer or wholesaler to carry the brand; (2) to persuade the retailer or wholesaler to carry more
units than the normal amount; (3) to induce retailers to promote the brand by featuring, display,
and price reductions; and (4) to stimulate retailers and their sales clerks to push the product.
The growing power of large retailers has increased their ability to demand trade promotion at
the expense of consumer promotion and advertising.64 The company’s sales force and its brand

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 18.3

Major Consumer Promotion Tools

Samples: Offer of a free amount of a product or service delivered door-to-door, sent in the mail,
picked up in a store, attached to another product, or featured in an advertising offer.
Coupons: Certificates entitling the bearer to a stated saving on the purchase of a specific product:
mailed, enclosed in other products or attached to them, or inserted in magazine and newspaper ads.
Cash Refund Offers (rebates): Provide a price reduction after purchase rather than at the retail
shop: Consumer sends a specified “proof of purchase” to the manufacturer who “refunds” part of the
purchase price by mail.
Price Packs (cents-off deals): Offers to consumers of savings off the regular price of a product,
flagged on the label or package. A reduced-price pack is a single package sold at a reduced price
(such as two for the price of one). A banded pack is two related products banded together (such as a
toothbrush and toothpaste).
Premiums (gifts): Merchandise offered at a relatively low cost or free as an incentive to purchase
a particular product. A with-pack premium accompanies the product inside or on the package. A
free in-the-mail premium is mailed to consumers who send in a proof of purchase, such as a box
top or UPC code. A self-liquidating premium is sold below its normal retail price to consumers who
request it.
Frequency Programs: Programs providing rewards related to the consumer’s frequency and
intensity in purchasing the company’s products or services.
Prizes (contests, sweepstakes, games): Prizes are offers of the chance to win cash, trips, or
merchandise as a result of purchasing something. A contest calls for consumers to submit an entry
to be examined by a panel of judges who will select the best entries. A sweepstakes asks consumers
to submit their names in a drawing. A game presents consumers with something every time they
buy—bingo numbers, missing letters—which might help them win a prize.
Patronage Awards: Values in cash or in other forms that are proportional to patronage of a certain
vendor or group of vendors.
Free Trials: Inviting prospective purchasers to try the product without cost in the hope that they
will buy.
Product Warranties: Explicit or implicit promises by sellers that the product will perform as specified
or that the seller will fix it or refund the customer’s money during a specified period.
Tie-in Promotions: Two or more brands or companies team up on coupons, refunds, and contests to
increase pulling power.
Cross-Promotions: Using one brand to advertise another noncompeting brand.
Point-of-Purchase (P-O-P) Displays and Demonstrations: P-O-P displays and demonstrations
take place at the point of purchase or sale.

TABLE 18.4

Major Trade Promotion Tools

Price-Off (off-invoice or off-list): A straight discount off the list price on each case purchased
during a stated time period.
Allowance: An amount offered in return for the retailer’s agreeing to feature the manufacturer’s products
in some way. An advertising allowance compensates retailers for advertising the manufacturer’s
product. A display allowance compensates them for carrying a special product display.
Free Goods: Offers of extra cases of merchandise to intermediaries who buy a certain quantity or who
feature a certain flavor or size.

| CHAPTER 18

521

522

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Reflecting changes in consumer
behavior, digital coupons such as
these, available at Coupons.com,
have grown in importance.

managers are often at odds over trade promotion. The sales force says local retailers will not keep
the company’s products on the shelf unless they receive more trade promotion money, whereas
brand managers want to spend their limited funds on consumer promotion and advertising.
Manufacturers face several challenges in managing trade promotions. First, they often find it difficult to police retailers to make sure they are doing what they agreed to do. Manufacturers increasingly
insist on proof of performance before paying any allowances. Second, some retailers are doing forward
buying—that is, buying a greater quantity during the deal period than they can immediately sell.
Retailers might respond to a 10 percent-off-case allowance by buying a 12-week or longer supply. The
manufacturer must then schedule more production than planned and bear the costs of extra work
shifts and overtime. Third, some retailers are diverting, buying more cases than needed in a region
where the manufacturer offers a deal and shipping the surplus to their stores in nondeal regions.
Manufacturers handle forward buying and diverting by limiting the amount they will sell at a discount, or by producing and delivering less than the full order in an effort to smooth production.65
Ultimately, many manufacturers feel trade promotion has become a nightmare. It contains layers of deals, is complex to administer, and often leads to lost revenues.

SELECTING BUSINESS AND SALES FORCE PROMOTION TOOLS Companies
spend billions of dollars on business and sales force promotion tools (see
Table 18.5) to gather
leads, impress and reward customers, and motivate the sales force.66 They typically develop budgets
for tools that remain fairly constant from year to year. For many new businesses that want to make
a splash to a targeted audience, especially in the B2B world, trade shows are an important tool, but
the cost per contact is the highest of all communication options.

Oreo Double
Stuf Promotion

DEVELOPING THE PROGRAM In planning sales promotion programs, marketers are
increasingly blending several media into a total campaign concept, such as the following awardwinning promotion.67

Oreo Double Stuf Promotion

Winner of the Promotional
Marketing Association’s Super Reggie award for best integrated marketing program of 2008,
Kraft’s Oreo Double Stuf Racing League promotion cleverly capitalized on the images of professional athlete siblings. In its teaser launch ad, NFL star quarterback brothers Peyton and Eli

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 18.5

Major Business and Sales Force Promotion Tools

Trade Shows and Conventions: Industry associations organize annual trade shows and
conventions. Trade shows are an $11.5 billion business, and business marketers may spend as much
as 35 percent of their annual promotion budget on trade shows. Trade show attendance can range
from a few thousand people to over 70,000 for large shows held by the restaurant or hotel-motel
industries. The International Consumer Electronics Show is one of the largest trade shows in the
world with more than 200,000 attendees in 2009. Participating vendors expect several benefits,
including generating new sales leads, maintaining customer contacts, introducing new products,
meeting new customers, selling more to present customers, and educating customers with
publications, videos, and other audiovisual materials.
Sales Contests: A sales contest aims at inducing the sales force or dealers to increase their sales
results over a stated period, with prizes (money, trips, gifts, or points) going to those who succeed.
Specialty Advertising: Specialty advertising consists of useful, low-cost items bearing the company’s
name and address, and sometimes an advertising message that salespeople give to prospects and customers. Common items are ballpoint pens, calendars, key chains, flashlights, tote bags, and memo pads.

Manning announced they were officially becoming two-sport competitors. A follow-up ad with the brothers
revealed that the classic “split and lick” ritual with Oreo cookies was becoming a professional sport. The
Mannings encouraged the public to join the league and to enter a sweepstakes that would award 10 winners a three-day trip to New Orleans to take part in a Double Stuf Lick Race (DSLR) competition and compete for a $10,000 prize. Kraft promoted the DSLR sweepstakes by placing the image of the Mannings on
15 million Oreo packages and setting up in-store and point-of-purchase displays. An instant-win game on
the Web site gave visitors a chance to earn one of 2,000 DSLR “training kits,” including a cooler, two
glasses, and a branded jersey. Professional tennis star sisters Serena and Venus Williams later appeared
in a second round of ads, challenging the Mannings to cookie-licking supremacy in what was billed as the
“ultimate sibling rivalry.”
In deciding to use a particular incentive, marketers must first determine its size. A certain minimum is necessary if the promotion is to succeed. Second, the marketing manager must establish
conditions for participation. Incentives might be offered to everyone or to select groups. Third,
the marketer must decide on the duration of the promotion. Fourth, the marketer must choose a
distribution vehicle. A 15-cents-off coupon can be distributed in the product package, in stores, by
mail, online, or in advertising. Fifth, the marketing manager must establish the timing of promotion,
and finally, the total sales promotion budget. The cost of a particular promotion consists of the administrative cost (printing, mailing, and promoting the deal) and the incentive cost (cost of premium or
cents-off, including redemption costs), multiplied by the expected number of units sold. The cost of a
coupon deal would recognize that only a fraction of consumers will redeem the coupons.

IMPLEMENTING AND EVALUATING THE PROGRAM Marketing managers must
prepare implementation and control plans that cover lead time and sell-in time for each individual
promotion. Lead time is the time necessary to prepare the program prior to launching it.68 Sell-in
time begins with the promotional launch and ends when approximately 95 percent of the deal
merchandise is in the hands of consumers.
Manufacturers can evaluate the program using sales data, consumer surveys, and experiments.
Sales (scanner) data helps analyze the types of people who took advantage of the promotion, what
they bought before the promotion, and how they behaved later toward the brand and other brands.
Sales promotions work best when they attract competitors’ customers who then switch. Consumer
surveys can uncover how many consumers recall the promotion, what they thought of it, how many
took advantage of it, and how the promotion affected subsequent brand-choice behavior.69
Experiments vary such attributes as incentive value, duration, and distribution media. For example,
coupons can be sent to half the households in a consumer panel. Scanner data can track whether
the coupons led more people to buy the product and when.

| CHAPTER 18

523

524

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Additional costs beyond the cost of specific promotions include the risk that promotions might
decrease long-run brand loyalty. Second, promotions can be more expensive than they appear.
Some are inevitably distributed to the wrong consumers. Third are the costs of special production
runs, extra sales force effort, and handling requirements. Finally, certain promotions irritate retailers, who may demand extra trade allowances or refuse to cooperate.

Events and Experiences
The IEG Sponsorship Report projected that $17.1 billion would be spent on sponsorships in North
America during 2010, with 68 percent going to sports; another 10 percent to entertainment tours
and attractions; 5 percent to festivals, fairs, and annual events; 5 percent to the arts; 3 percent to associations and membership organizations; and 9 percent to cause marketing.70 Becoming part of a
personally relevant moment in consumers’ lives through events and experiences can broaden and
deepen a company or brand’s relationship with the target market.
Daily encounters with brands may also affect consumers’ brand attitudes and beliefs.
Atmospheres are “packaged environments” that create or reinforce leanings toward product purchase. Law offices decorated with Oriental rugs and oak furniture communicate “stability” and
“success.”71 A five-star hotel will use elegant chandeliers, marble columns, and other tangible
signs of luxury. Many firms are creating on-site and off-site product and brand experiences.
There is Everything Coca-Cola in Las Vegas and M&M World in Times Square in New York.72
Many firms are creating their own events and experiences to create consumer and media interest and involvement. To showcase its international reach and upgrades in seating, food, and beverage, Delta Airlines created a temporary SKY360 pop-up retail lounge on West 57th Street in
Manhattan. The lounge featured samples of wine and food items from chef Todd English to eat and
drink, comfortable leather seats found in coach to sit in, and the seat-back entertainment system to
listen to.73 Given its central business location for the media industry, Manhattan is the site of many
events and experiences.74

GE Profile

A major Times Square event to
support the launch of a new line
of GE Profile washers and dryers
was part of an extensive integrated
marketing communications
program.

To promote its new GE Profile Frontload Washer and Dryer with
SmartDispense Technology—designed to optimize the amount of detergent used in any one
wash—GE used traditional online and mass media. To create even more buzz, the firm hung
800 feet of jeans and shirts on a massive clothesline in Times Square to represent the six months’
worth of washing the new machines could typically handle before needing more detergent. On one
of the traffic islands were 20-foot-high inflatable versions of the new washer/dryer. A live celebrity auction to
benefit the nonprofit Clothes Off Our Back Foundation was hosted by television mom Alison Sweeney. A small
army of 20 representatives handing out product-related goodies (such as bottles of water and coloring books
shaped like the appliance’s door) added to the spectacle. GE also ran an online promotion. All these efforts combined to attract 150,000 entrants to a washer/dryer giveaway contest.

Events Objectives
Marketers report a number of reasons to sponsor events:
1.

2.

To identify with a particular target market or lifestyle—
Customers can be targeted geographically, demographically,
psychographically, or behaviorally according to events. Old
Spice sponsors college sports and motor sports—including a
10-year deal with driver Tony Stewart’s entries in the Nextel
Cup and Busch Series—to highlight product relevance and
sample among its target audience of 16- to 24-year-old males.75
To increase salience of company or product name—Sponsorship
often offers sustained exposure to a brand, a necessary condition
to reinforce brand salience. Top-of-mind awareness for World
Cup soccer sponsors such as Emirates, Hyundai, Kia, and Sony
benefited from the repeated brand and ad exposure over the one
month–long tournament.

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

To create or reinforce perceptions of key brand image associations—Events themselves have
associations that help to create or reinforce brand associations.76 To toughen its image and appeal to America’s heartland, Toyota Tundra elected to sponsor B.A.S.S. fishing tournaments
and a Brooks & Dunn country music tour.
To enhance corporate image—Sponsorship can improve perceptions that the company is likable and prestigious. Although Visa views its long-standing Olympic sponsorship as a means
of enhancing international brand awareness and increasing usage and volume, it also engenders patriotic goodwill and taps into the emotional Olympic spirit.77
To create experiences and evoke feelings—The feelings engendered by an exciting or rewarding event may indirectly link to the brand. Audi models featured prominently in the 2010
blockbuster Iron Man 2, including main character Tony Stark’s personal R8 Spyder, the A8, Q5
and Q7 SUVs, and A3 hatchback. Backed by a month-long marketing blitz, surveys revealed
that positive word of mouth doubled for the brand.78
To express commitment to the community or on social issues—Cause-related marketing
sponsors nonprofit organizations and charities. Firms such as Timberland, Stonyfield Farms,
Home Depot, Starbucks, American Express, and Tom’s of Maine have made cause-related
marketing an important cornerstone of their marketing programs.
To entertain key clients or reward key employees—Many events include lavish hospitality tents
and other special services or activities only for sponsors and their guests. These perks engender
goodwill and establish valuable business contacts. From an employee perspective, events can
also build participation and morale or serve as an incentive. BB&T Corp., a major banking and
financial services player in the South and Southeast United States, used its NASCAR Busch
Series sponsorship to entertain business customers and its minor league baseball sponsorship
to generate excitement among employees.79
To permit merchandising or promotional opportunities—Many marketers tie contests or
sweepstakes, in-store merchandising, direct response, or other marketing activities with an
event. Ford, Coca-Cola, and AT&T Mobility have all used their sponsorship of the hit TV show
American Idol in this way.

Despite these potential advantages, the result of an event can still be unpredictable and beyond
the sponsor’s control. Although many consumers will credit sponsors for providing the financial
assistance to make an event possible, some may resent the commercialization of events.

Major Sponsorship Decisions
Making sponsorships successful requires choosing the appropriate events, designing the optimal
sponsorship program, and measuring the effects of sponsorship.80

CHOOSING EVENTS Because of the number of opportunities and their huge cost, many
marketers are becoming more selective about choosing sponsorship events.
The event must meet the marketing objectives and communication strategy defined for the
brand. The audience must match the target market. The event must have sufficient awareness,
possess the desired image, and be capable of creating the desired effects. Consumers must make
favorable attributions for the sponsor’s engagement. An ideal event is also unique but not encumbered with many sponsors, lends itself to ancillary marketing activities, and reflects or enhances
the sponsor’s brand or corporate image.81
DESIGNING SPONSORSHIP PROGRAMS Many marketers believe the marketing program
accompanying an event sponsorship ultimately determines its success. At least two to three times the
amount of the sponsorship expenditure should be spent on related marketing activities.
Event creation is a particularly important skill in publicizing fund-raising drives for nonprofit
organizations. Fund-raisers have developed a large repertoire of special events, including anniversary celebrations, art exhibits, auctions, benefit evenings, book sales, cake sales, contests, dances,
dinners, fairs, fashion shows, phonathons, rummage sales, tours, and walkathons.
More firms are now using their names to sponsor arenas, stadiums, and other venues that hold
events. Billions of dollars have been spent over the past decade for naming rights to major North
American sports facilities. But as with any sponsorship, the most important consideration is the
additional marketing activities.82

| CHAPTER 18

525

526

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

MEASURING SPONSORSHIP ACTIVITIES It’s a challenge to measure the success of events.
The supply-side measurement method focuses on potential exposure to the brand by assessing the
extent of media coverage, and the demand-side method focuses on exposure reported by
consumers. “Marketing Memo: Measuring High Performance Sponsorship Programs” offers some
guidelines critical to issues of sponsorship measurement from industry experts IEG.
Supply-side methods approximate the amount of time or space devoted to media coverage of
an event, for example, the number of seconds the brand is clearly visible on a television screen or
the column inches of press clippings that mention it. These potential “impressions” translate into a
value equivalent to the dollar cost of actually advertising in the particular media vehicle. Some
industry consultants have estimated that 30 seconds of TV logo exposure during a televised event
can be worth 6 percent, 10 percent, or as much as 25 percent of a 30-second TV ad spot.
Although supply-side exposure methods provide quantifiable measures, equating media
coverage with advertising exposure ignores the content of the respective communications. The
advertiser uses media space and time to communicate a strategically designed message. Media
coverage and telecasts only expose the brand and don’t necessarily embellish its meaning in any
direct way. Although some public relations professionals maintain that positive editorial coverage can be worth 5 to 10 times the equivalent advertising value, sponsorship rarely provides
such favorable treatment.83
The demand-side method identifies the effect sponsorship has on consumers’ brand knowledge. Marketers can survey event spectators to measure recall of the event as well as resulting attitudes and intentions toward the sponsor.

Creating Experiences
A large part of local, grassroots marketing is experiential marketing, which not only communicates
features and benefits but also connects a product or service with unique and interesting experiences.
“The idea is not to sell something, but to demonstrate how a brand can enrich a customer’s life.”84

marketing

Memo

Measuring High Performance Sponsorship Programs

1. Measure outcomes, not outputs. Focus on what a sponsorship actually
produced rather than what a sponsor got or did—rather than focus on
5,000 people sampled at an event, how many of those people would
be classified as members of the target market and what is the likely
conversion rate between their trial and future behaviors?
2. Define and benchmark objectives on the front end. Specific objectives
help to identify what measures should be tracked. An objective of motivating the sales force and distributors suggests different measures
than one of building brand image and key brand benefits. Contrast
measures in terms of sponsorship effects and what might have happened if the sponsorship had not occurred.
3. Measure return for each objective against prorated share of rights and
activation fees. Rank and rate objectives by importance and allocate the
total sponsorship budget against each of those objectives.

departments makes it easier to gain acceptance for any sponsorship analysis.
6. Research the emotional identities of customers and measure the
results of emotional connections. In what ways does a sponsorship
psychologically affect consumers and facilitate and deepen long-term
loyalty relationships?
7. Identify group norms. How strong of a community exists around the
sponsored event or participants? Are their formal groups that share
interests that will be impacted by the sponsorship?
8. Include cost savings in ROI calculations. Contrast expenses that a
firm has typically incurred in the past achieving a particular objective
from those expenses allocated to achieve the objective as part of the
sponsorship.

4. Measure behavior. Conduct a thorough sales analysis to identify shifts
in marketplace behavior as a result of the sponsorship.

9. Slice the data. Sponsorship affects market segments differently.
Breaking down a target market into smaller segments can better identify
sponsorship effects.

5. Apply the assumptions and ratios used by other departments
within the company. Applying statistical methods used by other

10. Capture normative data. Develop a core set of evaluation criteria that
can be applied across all different sponsorship programs.

Source: “Measuring High Performance Sponsorship Programs,” IEG Executive Brief, IEG Sponsorship Consulting, www.sponsorship.com, 2009.

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 18

527

Consumers seem to appreciate that. In one survey, four of five respondents found participating in a live event was more engaging than all
other forms of communication. The vast majority also felt experiential
marketing gave them more information than other forms of communication and would make them more likely to tell others about participating in the event and to be receptive to other marketing for the brand.85
Companies can even create a strong image by inviting prospects
and customers to visit their headquarters and factories. Ben &
Jerry’s, Boeing, Crayola, and Hershey’s all sponsor excellent company tours that draw millions of visitors a year. Companies such as
Hallmark, Kohler, and Beiersdorf (makers of NIVEA) have built
corporate museums at or near their headquarters that display their
history and the drama of producing and marketing their products.

Public Relations
Not only must the company relate constructively to customers, suppliers, and dealers, it must also relate to a large number of interested
publics. A public is any group that has an actual or potential interest
in or impact on a company’s ability to achieve its objectives. Public
relations (PR) includes a variety of programs to promote or protect
a company’s image or individual products.
The wise company takes concrete steps to manage successful relationships with its key publics. Most companies have a public relations
department that monitors the attitudes of the organization’s publics and
distributes information and communications to build goodwill. The
best PR departments counsel top management to adopt positive programs and eliminate questionable practices so negative publicity doesn’t
arise in the first place. They perform the following five functions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Press relations—Presenting news and information about the organization in the most positive
light
Product publicity—Sponsoring efforts to publicize specific products
Corporate communications—Promoting understanding of the organization through internal
and external communications
Lobbying—Dealing with legislators and government officials to promote or defeat legislation
and regulation
Counseling—Advising management about public issues, and company positions and image
during good times and bad

Marketing Public Relations
Many companies are turning to marketing public relations (MPR) to support corporate or product promotion and image making. MPR, like financial PR and community PR, serves a special constituency, the marketing department.
The old name for MPR was publicity, the task of securing editorial space—as opposed to paid
space—in print and broadcast media to promote or “hype” a product, service, idea, place, person, or
organization. MPR goes beyond simple publicity and plays an important role in the following tasks:
•
•
•

•

Launching new products. The amazing commercial success of toys such as LeapFrog, Beanie
Babies, and even the latest kids’ craze, Silly Bandz, owes a great deal to strong publicity.
Repositioning a mature product. In a classic PR case study, New York City had extremely bad
press in the 1970s until the “I Love New York” campaign.
Building interest in a product category. Companies and trade associations have used MPR to
rebuild interest in declining commodities such as eggs, milk, beef, and potatoes and to expand
consumption of such products as tea, pork, and orange juice.
Influencing specific target groups. McDonald’s sponsors special neighborhood events in
Latino and African American communities to build goodwill.

Crayola brings colorful fun to its
company tours and visits.

528

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

•

•

Defending products that have encountered public problems. PR professionals must be adept
at managing crises, such as those weathered by such well-established brands as Tylenol, Toyota,
and BP in 2010.
Building the corporate image in a way that reflects favorably on its products. Steve Jobs’s
heavily anticipated Macworld keynote speeches have helped to create an innovative, iconoclastic image for Apple Corporation.

As the power of mass advertising weakens, marketing managers are turning to MPR to build
awareness and brand knowledge for both new and established products. MPR is also effective in
blanketing local communities and reaching specific groups and can be more cost-effective than advertising. Nevertheless, it must be planned jointly with advertising.86
Clearly, creative public relations can affect public awareness at a fraction of the cost of advertising.
The company doesn’t pay for media space or time but only for a staff to develop and circulate the stories
and manage certain events. An interesting story picked up by the media can be worth millions of dollars
in equivalent advertising. Some experts say consumers are five times more likely to be influenced by
editorial copy than by advertising. The following is an example of an award-winning PR campaign.87

Man Lives in IKEA

IKEA showed that a highly successful marketing campaign does not have to cost a lot of money if PR is properly employed. With its PR firm Ketchum, the
company created the clever “Man Lives in IKEA” PR campaign. Using a budget of only $13,500,
IKEA allowed comedian Mark Malkoff to live in an apartment in the Paramus, New Jersey, store
from January 7 to 12, 2007, during which time he was allowed 24-hour access to film anything
and everything. The campaign’s goals included increasing sales, boosting traffic to IKEA-USA.com, and promoting two key brand messages: “IKEA has everything you need to live and make a home” and “Home is the most
important place in the world.” Ketchum and IKEA secured interviews with
store executives and planned the week’s schedule, which included a goodbye party featuring singer Lisa Loeb. Malkoff’s team documented his interactions, including with security guards and customers relaxing in his “home,”
and posted 25 videos during the week. MarkLivesInIKEA.com received more
than 15 million hits, and home-related IKEA blog coverage rose 356 percent
from January 2007 to January 2008. IKEA calculated that the effort generated more than 382 million positive media impressions. Coverage highlights
included the AP, Today, Good Morning America, and CNN. Sales at the
Paramus store were up 5.5 percent compared to January 2007, while traffic
to the IKEA Web site was up 6.8 percent.

Major Decisions in Marketing PR

In a clever PR campaign to reinforce its “everything for the
home” brand message, a man lived
in an IKEA store for almost a
week, which many people heard
about through the film crew
following him for a short documentary on his Web site: http://
www.marklivesinikea.com.

In considering when and how to use MPR, management must establish the marketing objectives, choose the PR messages and vehicles,
implement the plan carefully, and evaluate the results. The main
tools of MPR are described in
Table 18.6.

ESTABLISHING OBJECTIVES MPR can build awareness by placing stories in the media to bring
attention to a product, service, person, organization, or idea. It can build credibility by communicating the
message in an editorial context. It can help boost sales force and dealer enthusiasm with stories about a
new product before it is launched. It can hold down promotion cost because MPR costs less than directmail and media advertising.
Whereas PR practitioners reach their target publics through the mass media, MPR is increasingly
borrowing the techniques and technology of direct-response marketing to reach target audience
members one-on-one.

CHOOSING MESSAGES AND VEHICLES Suppose a relatively unknown college wants
more visibility. The MPR practitioner will search for stories. Are any faculty members working on
unusual projects? Are any new and unusual courses being taught? Are any interesting events taking
place on campus? If there are no interesting stories, the MPR practitioner should propose
newsworthy events the college could sponsor. Here the challenge is to create meaningful news.

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

TABLE 18.6

| CHAPTER 18

529

Major Tools in Marketing PR

Publications: Companies rely extensively on published materials to reach and influence their target
markets. These include annual reports, brochures, articles, company newsletters and magazines, and
audiovisual materials.
Events: Companies can draw attention to new products or other company activities by arranging
and publicizing special events such as news conferences, seminars, outings, trade shows, exhibits,
contests and competitions, and anniversaries that will reach the target publics.
Sponsorships: Companies can promote their brands and corporate name by sponsoring and
publicizing sports and cultural events and highly regarded causes.
News: One of the major tasks of PR professionals is to find or create favorable news about the
company, its products, and its people and to get the media to accept press releases and attend
press conferences.
Speeches: Increasingly, company executives must field questions from the media or give talks
at trade associations or sales meetings, and these appearances can build the company’s image.
Public Service Activities: Companies can build goodwill by contributing money and time to good
causes.
Identity Media: Companies need a visual identity that the public immediately recognizes. The visual
identity is carried by company logos, stationery, brochures, signs, business forms, business cards,
buildings, uniforms, and dress codes.

PR ideas include hosting major academic conventions, inviting expert or celebrity speakers, and
developing news conferences.
Each event and activity is an opportunity to develop a multitude of stories directed at different
audiences. A good PR campaign will engage the public from a variety of angles, as did this awardwinning Dreyer’s Ice Cream campaign.88

Dreyer’s Ice Cream In PRWeek’s Campaign of the Year in 2010,
Dreyer’s Ice Cream teamed up with PR firm Ketchum to launch a campaign to turn the
tough economic environment into a positive. Taking advantage of the 80th anniversary of its
introduction of the Rocky Road flavor—designed to cheer people up during the
Great Depression—Dreyer’s launched a celebratory limited edition “Red, White
& No More Blues!” flavor. The ice cream combined rich, creamy vanilla ice cream with
swirls of real strawberry and blueberry. The ensuing “A Taste of Recovery” campaign was
designed to reinforce the feel-good aspects of the brand. A Monster.com-posted contest
asked contestants to submit videos explaining a personal dream they would fulfill if they
earned $100,000 for scooping ice cream. The contest drew over 85,000 online visits and
more than 14,000 entries. A media blitz greeting the winner helped to contribute to the
46 million media impressions the campaign enjoyed. Despite tough economic times, sales
of Dreyer’s Slow Churned Limited Editions ice cream increased over 25 percent from the
previous year.

IMPLEMENTING THE PLAN AND EVALUATING RESULTS MPR’s
contribution to the bottom line is difficult to measure, because it is used along with
other promotional tools.
The easiest measure of MPR effectiveness is the number of exposures carried by the
media. Publicists supply the client with a clippings book showing all the media that
carried news about the product and a summary statement such as the following:
Media coverage included 3,500 column inches of news and photographs in 350 publications with a combined circulation of 79.4 million; 2,500 minutes of air time on

A brand anniversary is a great
opportunity to celebrate what is
good about a brand, as Dreyer’s
did via its special-edition ice cream.

530

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

290 radio stations and an estimated audience of 65 million; and 660 minutes of air time on
160 television stations with an estimated audience of 91 million. If this time and space had
been purchased at advertising rates, it would have amounted to $1,047,000.89
This measure is not very satisfying because it contains no indication of how many people actually
read, heard, or recalled the message and what they thought afterward; nor does it contain information about the net audience reached, because publications overlap in readership. It also ignores the
effects of electronic media. Publicity’s goal is reach, not frequency, so it would be more useful to
know the number of unduplicated exposures across all media types.
A better measure is the change in product awareness, comprehension, or attitude resulting from
the MPR campaign (after allowing for the effect of other promotional tools). For example, how
many people recall hearing the news item? How many told others about it (a measure of word of
mouth)? How many changed their minds after hearing it?

Summary
1. Advertising is any paid form of nonpersonal presentation
and promotion of ideas, goods, or services by an identified sponsor. Advertisers include not only business firms
but also charitable, nonprofit, and government agencies.
2. Developing an advertising program is a five-step
process: (1) Set advertising objectives, (2) establish a
budget, (3) choose the advertising message and creative strategy, (4) decide on the media, and (5) evaluate
communication and sales effects.
3. Sales promotion consists of mostly short-term incentive
tools, designed to stimulate quicker or greater purchase of
particular products or services by consumers or the trade.
4. In using sales promotion, a company must establish its
objectives, select the tools, develop the program,
pretest the program, implement and control it, and evaluate the results.

5. Events and experiences are a means to become part of
special and more personally relevant moments in consumers’ lives. Events can broaden and deepen the
sponsor’s relationship with its target market, but only if
managed properly.
6. Public relations (PR) includes a variety of programs designed to promote or protect a company’s image or its
individual products. Marketing public relations (MPR), to
support the marketing department in corporate or
product promotion and image making, can affect public
awareness at a fraction of the cost of advertising and is
often much more credible. The main tools of PR are
publications, events, news, community affairs, identification media, lobbying, and social responsibility.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Should Marketers Test Advertising?

Marketing Discussion
Television Advertising

Advertising creatives have long lamented ad pretesting.
They believe it inhibits their creative process and results in
too much sameness in commercials. Marketers, on the
other hand, believe pretesting provides necessary checks
and balances to ensure the ad campaign will connect with
consumers and be well received in the marketplace.
Take a position: Ad pretesting in often an unnecessary
waste of marketing dollars versus Ad pretesting provides an important diagnostic for marketers as to the
likely success of an ad campaign.

What are some of your favorite TV ads? Why? How effective are
the message and creative strategies? How are they creating
consumer preference and loyalty and building brand equity?

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

Marketing Excellence

>>Coca-Cola

When it comes to mass marketing, perhaps no one does it
better than Coca-Cola. Coke is the most popular and
best-selling soft drink in history. With an annual marketing
budget of nearly $3 billion and annual sales exceeding
$30 billion, the brand tops the Interbrand ranking year after
year. Today, Coca-Cola holds a current brand value of
$68 billion and reaches consumers in over 200 countries,
making it the best-known product in the world. In fact,
Coca-Cola is such a global phenomenon that its name is
the second-most understood word in the world (after okay).
The history of Coke’s success is astonishing. The
drink was invented in 1886 by Dr. John S. Pemberton,
who mixed a syrup of his own invention with carbonated
water to cure headaches. The company’s first president
later turned the product into a pop culture phenomenon
by introducing it to pharmacists and consumers around
the world and handing out clocks, posters, and other
paraphernalia with the Coca-Cola logo.
Coca-Cola believed early on that to gain worldwide
acceptance, the brand needed to connect emotionally
and socially with the masses, and the product needed to
be “within arm’s-length of desire.” So the company focused on gaining extensive distribution and worked hard
at making the product loved by all. In World War II, it declared that “every man in uniform gets a bottle of CocaCola for 5 cents, wherever he is, and whatever it costs the
company.” This strategy helped introduce the soft drink to
people around the world as well as connect with them
positively in a time of turmoil.
Why is Coca-Cola so much bigger than any other
competitor? What Coke does better than everyone else is
create highly current, uplifting global campaigns that translate well into different countries, languages, and cultures.
Coke’s advertising over the years has primarily focused
on the product’s ability to quench thirst and the brand’s

| CHAPTER 18

531

magical ability to connect people no matter who they are
or how they live. Andy Warhol said it best, “A Coke is a
Coke and no amount of money can get you a better Coke
than the one the bum on the corner is drinking.”
One of Coca-Cola’s most memorable and successful
commercials was called “Hilltop” and featured the song,
“I’d like to buy the world a Coke.” Launched in 1971, the
ad featured young adults from all over the world sharing a
happy, harmonious moment and common bond (drinking
a Coke) on a hillside in Italy. The commercial touched so
many consumers emotionally and so effectively showed
the worldwide appeal of Coke that the song became a
top ten hit single later that year.
Coca-Cola’s television commercials still touch upon
the message of universal connection over a Coke, often
in a lighthearted tone to appeal to a young audience. In
one spot, a group of young adults sit around a campfire,
playing the guitar, laughing, smiling, and passing around a
bottle of Coke. The bottle reaches a slimy, one-eyed alien
who joins in on the fun, takes a sip from the bottle, and
passes it along. When the next drinker wipes off the slime
in disgust, the music stops suddenly and the group stares
at him in disappointment. The man hesitantly hands the
bottle back to the alien to get re-slimed and then drinks
from it, and the music and the party continue in perfect
harmony.
Coca-Cola’s mass communications strategy has
evolved over the years and today mixes a wide range of
media including television, radio, print, online, in-store,
digital, billboard, public relations, events, paraphernalia,
and even its own museum. The company’s target audience and reach are so massive that choosing the right
media and marketing message is critical. Coca-Cola uses
big events to hit huge audiences; it has sponsored the
Olympics since 1928 and advertises during the Super
Bowl. Red Coke cups are placed front and center during
top-rated television shows like American Idol, and the
company spends over $1 billion a year on sports sponsorships such as NASCAR and the World Cup. CocaCola’s global campaigns must also be relevant on a local
scale. In China, for example, Coca-Cola has given its regional managers control over its advertising so they can
include appropriate cultural messages.
The delicate balance between Coca-Cola’s local and
global marketing is crucial because, as one Coca-Cola
executive explained, “Creating effective marketing at a local level in the absence of global scale can lead to huge
inefficiencies.” In 2006, for example, Coca-Cola ran two
campaigns during the FIFA World Cup as well as several
local campaigns. In 2010, the company ran a single campaign during the same event in over 100 markets.
Executives at Coca-Cola estimated that the latter, more
global strategy saved the company over $45 million in
efficiencies.

532

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Despite its unprecedented success over the years,
Coke is not perfect. In 1985, in perhaps the worst product
launch ever, Coca-Cola introduced New Coke—a sweeter
concoction of the original secret formula. Consumers
instantly rejected it and sales plummeted. Three months
later, Coca-Cola retracted New Coke and relaunched the
original formula under the name Coca-Cola Classic, to the
delight of customers everywhere. Then-CEO Roberto
Goizueta stated, “The simple fact is that all the time and
money and skill poured into consumer research on the
new Coca-Cola could not measure or reveal the deep and
abiding emotional attachment to original Coca-Cola felt by
so many people.”
Coca-Cola’s success at marketing a product on such
a global, massive scale is unique. No other product is so
universally available, universally accepted, and universally
loved. As the company continues to grow, it seeks out
new ways to better connect with even more individuals.

Marketing Excellence

>>Gillette

Gillette knows men. Not only does the company understand what products men desire for their grooming
needs, it also knows how to market to men all around the
world. Since the invention of the safety razor by King C.
Gillette in 1901, Gillette has had a number of breakthrough product innovations. These include the first twinblade shaving system in 1971 named the Trac II, a razor
with a pivoting head in 1977 called the Atra, and the first
razor with spring-mounted twin blades in 1989 dubbed
the Sensor. In 1998, Gillette introduced the first tripleblade system, Mach3, which became a billion-dollar
brand surpassed only by the 2006 launch of the “best

Referring to itself as a “Happiness Factory,” it is optimistic
that it will succeed.
Questions
1. What does Coca-Cola stand for? Is it the same for
everyone? Explain.
2. Coca-Cola has successfully marketed to billions of
people around the world. Why is it so successful?
3. Can Pepsi or any other company ever surpass CocaCola? Why or why not? What are Coca-Cola’s greatest
risks?
Sources: Natalie Zmuda, “Coca-Cola Lays Out Its Vision for the Future at 2010 Meeting.”
Advertising Age, November 22, 2009; Natalie Zmuda, “Coke’s ‘Open Happiness’ Keeps It Simple
for Global Audience,” Advertising Age, January 21, 2009; John Greenwald, “Will Teens Buy It?”
Time, June 24, 2001; “Coca-Cola Still Viewed as Most Valuable Brand.” USA Today, September 18,
2009; Edward Rothstein, “Ingredients: Carbonated Water, High-Fructose Corniness . . .”
New York Times, July 30, 2007; Brad Cook, “Coca-Cola: A Classic,” Brandchannel, December 2,
2002; Coca-Cola, Annual Report.

shave on the planet”—the six-bladed Fusion, with five
blades in the front for regular shaving and one in the back
for trimming.
Today, Gillette holds a commanding lead in the
shaving and razor business with a 70 percent global
market share and $7.5 billion in annual sales. Six hundred million men use a Gillette product every day, and
the Fusion razor accounts for 45 percent of the men’s
razors sold in the United States. Gillette’s mass appeal is
a result of several factors, including extensive consumer
research, quality product innovations, and successful
mass communications.
While Gillette’s product launches have improved
male grooming, it’s the company’s impressive marketing
knowledge and campaigns that have helped it reach
this international level of success. Traditionally, Gillette
uses one global marketing message rather than individual targeted messages for each country or region. This
message is backed by a wide spectrum of advertising
support, including athletic sponsorships, television
campaigns, in-store promotions, print ads, online advertising, and direct marketing.
Gillette’s most recent global marketing effort, “The
Moment,” launched in 2009, is an extension of its wellrecognized campaign, “The Best a Man Can Get.” The
campaign features everyday men as well as the Gillette
Champions—baseball star Derek Jeter, tennis champion Roger Federer, and soccer great Thierry Henry—
experiencing moments of doubt and Gillette’s grooming
products helping them gain confidence. The campaign
was designed to help Gillette expand beyond razors
and shaving and increase sales of its entire line of

MANAGING MASS COMMUNICATIONS

grooming products. The massive marketing effort
launched around the globe and included television,
print, online, and point-of-sale advertising.
Another crucial element in Gillette’s marketing strategy is sports marketing. Gillette’s natural fit with baseball
and tradition has helped the company connect emotionally with its core audience, and its sponsorship with Major
League Baseball dates to 1939. Tim Brosnan, EVP for
Major League Baseball, explained, “Gillette is a sports
marketing pioneer that paved the way for modern day
sports sponsorship and endorsements.” Gillette ads have
featured baseball heroes such as Hank Aaron, Mickey
Mantle, and Honus Wagner from as early as 1910.
Gillette also has ties to football. The company sponsors
Gillette Stadium, home of the New England Patriots, and is
a corporate sponsor of the NFL, making four of its products,
Gillette, Old Spice, Head & Shoulders, and Febreze, “Official
Locker Room Products of the NFL.” Gillette’s partnership
includes sweepstakes to win NFL game tickets, Web site
promotions, and ties to the NFL, such as the presence of
some NFL players in its commercials. Gillette also sponsors
several NASCAR races and drivers and the UK Tri-Nations
rugby tournament. It even created a Zamboni at the Boston
Bruins game that looked like a huge Fusion razor shaving
the ice.
While sports marketing is a critical element of
Gillette’s marketing strategy, the brand aims to reach all
men and therefore aligns itself with musicians, video

| CHAPTER 18

533

games, and movies—in one James Bond film, Goldfinger,
a Gillette razor contained a homing device.
When Procter & Gamble acquired Gillette in 2005 for
$57 billion (a record five times sales), it aimed for more
than sales and profit. P&G, an expert on marketing to
women, wanted to learn about marketing to men on a
global scale, and no one tops Gillette.
Questions
1. Gillette has successfully convinced the world that
“more is better” in terms of number of blades and
other razor features. Why has that worked in the
past? What’s next?
2. Some of Gillette’s spokespeople such as Tiger
Woods have run into controversy after becoming endorsers for the brand. Does this hurt Gillette’s brand
equity or marketing message? Explain.
3. Can Gillette ever become as successful at marketing
to women? Why or why not?
Sources: Gillette press release, “Gillette Launches New Global Brand Marketing Campaign,”
July 1, 2009; Major League Baseball press release, “Major League Baseball Announces Extension
of Historic Sponsorship with Gillette Dating Back to 1939,” April 16, 2009; Gillette, 2009 Annual
Report; Jeremy Mullman and Rich Thomaselli, “Why Tiger Is Still the Best Gillette Can Get,”
Advertising Age, December 7, 2009; Louise Story, “Procter and Gillette Learn from Each Other’s
Marketing Ways,” New York Times, April 12, 2007; Dan Beucke, “A Blade Too Far,” BusinessWeek,
August 14, 2006; Jenn Abelson, “And Then There Were Five,” Boston Globe, September 15, 2005;
Jack Neff, “Six-Blade Blitz,” Advertising Age, September 19, 2005, pp. 3, 53; Editorial, “Gillette
Spends Smart on Fusion,” Advertising Age, September 26, 2005, p. 24.

534

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. How can companies conduct
direct marketing for competitive
advantage?
2. How can companies carry out
effective interactive marketing?
3. How does word of mouth affect
marketing success?
4. What decisions do companies
face in designing and managing
a sales force?
5. How can salespeople improve
their selling, negotiating, and
relationship marketing skills?

Reflecting new consumer sensibilities that focus on the good that
companies do, Pepsi used the
Super Bowl to launch a major new
cause marketing initiative instead of
its typical splashy ad campaigns.

r
e
t
ap
h
C

19

Managing Personal
Communications: Direct
and Interactive Marketing,
Word of Mouth,
and Personal Selling
In the face of the Internet revolution, marketing communications today
increasingly occur as a kind of personal dialogue between the company and its customers.
Companies must ask not only “How should we reach our customers?” but also “How should our
customers reach us?” and “How can our customers reach each other?” New technologies have
encouraged companies to move from mass communication to more targeted, two-way communications. Consumers now play a much more participatory role in the marketing process. Consider
how Pepsi has engaged the consumer in its marketing communications.1

For the first time in 23 years, PepsiCo chose not to advertise any of its soft drink brands
during the biggest U.S. media event, the Super Bowl. Instead, it launched its ambitious
Pepsi Refresh Project. With a tagline “Every Pepsi Refreshes the World,” Pepsi earmarked $20 million for the program to fund ideas from anyone, anywhere, anytime to
make a difference in six areas: health, arts and culture, food and shelter, the planet,
neighborhoods, and education. Ideas are submitted at refresheverything.com and voted online by the general public. A significant presMarketers are trying to figure out the right way to be part of
ence on Facebook, Twitter, and other social networks is a key aspect to
the consumer conversation. Personalizing communications and
the program. The first grant recipients received funding for a variety of creating dialogues by saying and doing the right thing to the
different projects, including building a community playground, provid- right person at the right time is critical for marketing
ing care packages and comfort items for troops in the field or recover- effectiveness. In this chapter, we consider how companies
ing from wounds at home, and conducting financial literacy sessions personalize their marketing communications to have more
for teens. Pepsi also allocated an additional $1.3 million in the summer impact. We begin by evaluating direct and interactive marketing,
of 2010 to support communities in the Gulf of Mexico region affected then move to word-of-mouth marketing, and finish by
considering personal selling and the sales force.
by the catastrophic oil spill.

Direct Marketing
Today, many marketers build long-term relationships with customers.2 They send birthday cards,
information materials, or small premiums. Airlines, hotels, and other businesses adopt frequency
reward programs and club programs.3 Direct marketing is the use of consumer-direct (CD)
channels to reach and deliver goods and services to customers without using marketing middlemen.
535

536

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Direct marketers can use a number of channels to reach individual prospects and customers:
direct mail, catalog marketing, telemarketing, interactive TV, kiosks, Web sites, and mobile devices.
They often seek a measurable response, typically a customer order, through direct-order marketing.
Direct marketing has been a fast-growing avenue for serving customers, partly in response to the
high and increasing costs of reaching business markets through a sales force. Sales produced
through traditional direct marketing channels (catalogs, direct mail, and telemarketing) have been
growing rapidly, along with direct-mail sales, which include sales to the consumer market, B2B, and
fund-raising by charitable institutions.
Direct marketing has been outpacing U.S. retail sales. It accounted for almost 53 percent of total
advertising spending in 2009, and companies spent more than $149 billion on direct marketing per
year, accounting for 8.3 percent of GDP.4

The Benefits of Direct Marketing
Market demassification has resulted in an ever-increasing number of market niches. Consumers
short of time and tired of traffic and parking headaches appreciate toll-free phone numbers,
always-open Web sites, next-day delivery, and direct marketers’ commitment to customer service.
In addition, many chain stores have dropped slower-moving specialty items, creating an opportunity
for direct marketers to promote these to interested buyers instead.
Sellers benefit from demassification as well. Direct marketers can buy a mailing list containing the names of almost any group: left-handed people, overweight people, millionaires. They can
customize and personalize messages and build a continuous relationship with each customer.
New parents will receive periodic mailings describing new clothes, toys, and other goods as their
child grows.
Direct marketing can reach prospects at the moment they want a solicitation and therefore be
noticed by more highly interested prospects. It lets marketers test alternative media and messages
to find the most cost-effective approach. Direct marketing also makes the direct marketer’s offer
and strategy less visible to competitors. Finally, direct marketers can measure responses to their
campaigns to decide which have been the most profitable. One successful direct marketer is
L.L.Bean.5

L.L.Bean

L.L.Bean’s founder Leon Leonwood (L.L.) Bean returned from a
Maine hunting trip in 1911 with cold, damp feet and a revolutionary idea. His Maine
Hunting Shoe stitched leather uppers to workmen’s rubber boots to create a comfortable,
functional boot. To a mailing list of hunters, Bean sent a three-page flyer describing the
benefits of the new product and backing it with a complete guarantee. The shoe, however,
did not meet with initial success. Of his first 100 orders, 90 were returned when the tops and bottoms
separated. True to his word, Bean refunded the purchase price and the problem was fixed. L.L.Bean
quickly became known as a trusted source for reliable outdoor equipment and expert advice. The
L.L.Bean guarantee of 100 percent satisfaction is still at the core of the company’s business, as is the
original L.L. Bean’s Golden Rule, “Sell good merchandise at a reasonable profit, treat your customers
like human beings, and they will always come back for more.” Today, L.L.Bean is a $1.4 billion company.
In 2009, it produced 49 different catalogs and received 11 million customer contacts. The company’s
Web site is among the top-rated e-commerce sites, and its growing number of retail stores and outlets
retain the company’s legendary customer service.
Direct marketing must be integrated with other communications and channel activities.6 Direct
marketing companies such as Eddie Bauer, Lands’ End, and the Franklin Mint made fortunes
building their brands in the direct marketing mail-order and phone-order business and then
opened retail stores. They cross-promote their stores, catalogs, and Web sites, for example, by putting their Web addresses on their shopping bags.
Successful direct marketers view a customer interaction as an opportunity to up-sell, cross-sell,
or just deepen a relationship. These marketers make sure they know enough about each customer
to customize and personalize offers and messages and develop a plan for lifetime marketing to each
valuable customer, based on their knowledge of life events and transitions. They also carefully

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

537

L.L.Bean has a decades-long legacy
of fully satisfying customer
needs—guaranteed!

New Zealand
Yellow Pages

orchestrate each element of their campaigns. Here is an example of an award-winning campaign
that did just that.7

New Zealand Yellow Pages

One of the Direct Marketing
Association’s top ECHO award winners in 2009 was New Zealand’s Yellow Pages Group. With
a theme of “Job Done,” the group recruited a young woman to be the focus of the campaign
and gave her the task of building a restaurant 40 feet above the ground in a redwood tree,
using only help found via the Yellow Pages. A TV ad, billboard, and online media launched the
campaign, and a Web site provided updates. Access to the striking pod-shaped structure Treehouse was
provided by an elevated treetop walkway. The restaurant actually operated from December 2008 to
February 2009 as part of the campaign. Highly popular, the campaign was credited with increasing the use
of Yellow Pages by 11 percent to record levels.
We next consider some of the key issues that characterize different direct marketing channels.

538

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Direct Mail
Direct-mail marketing means sending an offer, announcement,
reminder, or other item to an individual consumer. Using highly
selective mailing lists, direct marketers send out millions of mail
pieces each year—letters, flyers, foldouts, and other “salespeople
with wings.” Some direct marketers mail multimedia DVDs to
prospects and customers.
Direct mail is a popular medium because it permits target market
selectivity, can be personalized, is flexible, and allows early testing
and response measurement. Although the cost per thousand is
higher than for mass media, the people reached are much better
prospects. The success of direct mail, however, has also become its
liability—so many marketers are sending out direct-mail pieces
that mailboxes are becoming stuffed, leading some consumers to
disregard the blizzard of solicitations they receive.
In constructing an effective direct-mail campaign, direct marketers must choose their objectives, target markets and prospects,
offer elements, means of testing the campaign, and measures of campaign success.

To dramatically demonstrate the
utility of its product, the New
Zealand Yellow Pages engaged
a designer to build a tree-top
restaurant using only help hired
through the Yellow Pages.

OBJECTIVES Most direct marketers aim to receive an order from
prospects and judge a campaign’s success by the response rate. An
order-response rate of 2 percent to 4 percent is normally considered
good, although this number varies with product category, price, and
the nature of the offering.8 Direct mail can also produce prospect
leads, strengthen customer relationships, inform and educate customers, remind customers of
offers, and reinforce recent customer purchase decisions.
TARGET MARKETS AND PROSPECTS Most direct marketers apply the RFM (recency,
frequency, monetary amount) formula to select customers according to how much time has passed
since their last purchase, how many times they have purchased, and how much they have spent
since becoming a customer. Suppose the company is offering a leather jacket. It might make this
offer to the most attractive customers—those who made their last purchase between 30 and 60 days
ago, who make three to six purchases a year, and who have spent at least $100 since becoming
customers. Points are established for varying RFM levels; the more points, the more attractive
the customer.9
Marketers also identify prospects on the basis of age, sex, income, education, previous mailorder purchases, and occasion. College freshmen will buy laptop computers, backpacks, and
compact refrigerators; newlyweds look for housing, furniture, appliances, and bank loans.
Another useful variable is consumer lifestyle or “passions” such as electronics, cooking, and
the outdoors.
Dun & Bradstreet provides a wealth of data for B2B direct marketing. Here the prospect is often
not an individual but a group or committee of both decision makers and decision influencers. Each
member needs to be treated differently, and the timing, frequency, nature, and format of contact
must reflect the member’s status and role.
The company’s best prospects are customers who have bought its products in the past. The
direct marketer can also buy lists of names from list brokers, but these lists often have problems,
including name duplication, incomplete data, and obsolete addresses. Better lists include overlays of demographic and psychographic information. Direct marketers typically buy and test a
sample before buying more names from the same list. They can build their own lists by advertising a promotional offer and collecting responses.

OFFER ELEMENTS The offer strategy has five elements—the product, the offer, the medium, the
distribution method, and the creative strategy.10 Fortunately, all can be tested. The direct-mail
marketer also must choose five components of the mailing itself: the outside envelope, sales letter,
circular, reply form, and reply envelope. A common direct marketing strategy is to follow up direct
mail with an e-mail.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

TESTING ELEMENTS One of the great advantages of direct marketing is the ability to test,
under real marketplace conditions, different elements of an offer strategy, such as products,
product features, copy platform, mailer type, envelope, prices, or mailing lists.
Response rates typically understate a campaign’s long-term impact. Suppose only 2 percent of
the recipients who receive a direct-mail piece advertising Samsonite luggage place an order. A much
larger percentage became aware of the product (direct mail has high readership), and some
percentage may have formed an intention to buy at a later date (either by mail or at a retail outlet).
Some may mention Samsonite luggage to others as a result of the direct-mail piece. To better estimate a promotion’s impact, some companies measure the impact of direct marketing on awareness,
intention to buy, and word of mouth.
MEASURING CAMPAIGN SUCCESS: LIFETIME VALUE By adding up the planned
campaign costs, the direct marketer can determine the needed break-even response rate. This rate
must be net of returned merchandise and bad debts. A specific campaign may fail to break even in
the short run but can still be profitable in the long run if customer lifetime value is factored in (see
Chapter 5) by calculating the average customer longevity, average customer annual expenditure,
and average gross margin, minus the average cost of customer acquisition and maintenance
(discounted for the opportunity cost of money).11

Catalog Marketing
In catalog marketing, companies may send full-line merchandise catalogs, specialty consumer
catalogs, and business catalogs, usually in print form but also as DVDs or online. In 2009, three of
the top B-to-C catalog sellers were Dell ($51 billion), Staples ($8.9 billion), and CDW ($8.1 billion).
Three top B-to-B catalog sellers were Thermo Scientific lab and research supplies ($10.5 billion),
Henry Schien dental, medical, and vet supplies ($6.4 billion), and WESCO International electrical
and industry maintenance supplies ($6.1 billion). Thousands of small businesses also issue specialty
catalogs.12 Many direct marketers find combining catalogs and Web sites an effective way to sell.
Catalogs are a huge business—the Internet and catalog retailing industry includes 16,000 companies with combined annual revenue of $235 billion.13 The success of a catalog business depends
on managing customer lists carefully to avoid duplication or bad debts, controlling inventory,
offering good-quality merchandise so returns are low, and projecting a distinctive image. Some
companies add literary or information features, send swatches of materials, operate a special online
or telephone hotline to answer questions, send gifts to their best customers, and donate a percentage of profits to good causes. Putting their entire catalog online also provides business marketers
with better access to global consumers than ever before, saving printing and mailing costs.

Telemarketing
Telemarketing is the use of the telephone and call centers to attract prospects, sell to existing customers, and provide service by taking orders and answering questions. It helps companies increase
revenue, reduce selling costs, and improve customer satisfaction. Companies use call centers for
inbound telemarketing—receiving calls from customers—and outbound telemarketing—initiating
calls to prospects and customers.
Although outbound telemarketing historically has been a major direct marketing tool, its potentially intrusive nature led the Federal Trade Commission to establish a National Do Not Call Registry in
2003. About 191 million consumers who did not want telemarketing calls at home were registered by
2009. Because only political organizations, charities, telephone surveyors, or companies with existing
relationships with consumers are exempt, consumer telemarketing has lost much of its effectiveness.14
Business-to-business telemarketing is increasing, however. Raleigh Bicycles used telemarketing to
reduce the personal selling costs of contacting its dealers. In the first year, sales force travel costs dropped
50 percent and sales in a single quarter went up 34 percent. As it improves with the use of videophones,
telemarketing will increasingly replace, though never eliminate, more expensive field sales calls.

Other Media for Direct-Response Marketing
Direct marketers use all the major media. Newspapers and magazines carry ads offering books,
clothing, appliances, vacations, and other goods and services that individuals can order via toll-free
numbers. Radio ads present offers 24 hours a day. Some companies prepare 30- and 60-minute

| CHAPTER 19

539

540

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

infomercials to combine the sell of television commercials with the draw of information and entertainment. Infomercials promote products that are complicated or technologically advanced, or that
require a great deal of explanation (Carnival Cruises, Mercedes, Universal Studios, and even
Monster.com). At-home shopping channels are dedicated to selling goods and services on a toll-free
number or via the Web for delivery within 48 hours.

Public and Ethical Issues in Direct Marketing
Direct marketers and their customers usually enjoy mutually rewarding relationships. Occasionally,
however, a darker side emerges:
•
•
•

•

Irritation. Many people don’t like hard-sell, direct marketing solicitations.
Unfairness. Some direct marketers take advantage of impulsive or less sophisticated buyers or
prey on the vulnerable, especially the elderly.15
Deception and fraud. Some direct marketers design mailers and write copy intended to
mislead or exaggerate product size, performance claims, or the “retail price.” The Federal Trade
Commission receives thousands of complaints each year about fraudulent investment scams
and phony charities.
Invasion of privacy. It seems that almost every time consumers order products by mail or
telephone, apply for a credit card, or take out a magazine subscription, their names, addresses,
and purchasing behavior may be added to several company databases. Critics worry that
marketers may know too much about consumers’ lives, and that they may use this knowledge
to take unfair advantage.

People in the direct marketing industry know that, left unattended, such problems will lead to
increasingly negative consumer attitudes, lower response rates, and calls for greater state and
federal regulation. Most direct marketers want the same thing consumers want: honest and welldesigned marketing offers targeted only to those who appreciate hearing about them.

Interactive Marketing
The newest and fastest-growing channels for communicating and selling directly to customers are
electronic.16 The Internet provides marketers and consumers with opportunities for much greater
interaction and individualization. Soon few marketing programs will be considered complete without a meaningful online component.
Online

4:13

TV and video

3:17

Music and radio

1:26

Mobile phone

1:18

Landline phone

0:36

Gaming

0:36

Reading

0:24

|Fig. 19.1|

Average Time Spent
per Day with Select
Media According to
US Consumers, 2009
(hrs:mins)
Source: Yankee Group, “2009 Advertising Forecast
Update: Less TV, More Internet,” April 6, 2010.
Copyright 1997-2010. Yankee Group. All rights
reserved.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Interactive Marketing
The variety of online communication options means companies can send tailored messages that
engage consumers by reflecting their special interests and behavior. The Internet is also highly accountable and its effects can be easily traced by noting how many unique visitors or “UVs” click on
a page or ad, how long they spend with it, and where they go afterward.17
Marketers can build or tap into online communities, inviting participation from consumers and
creating a long-term marketing asset in the process. The Web offers the advantage of contextual
placement, buying ads on sites related to the marketer’s offerings. Marketers can also place advertising based on keywords from search engines, to reach people when they’ve actually started the buying process.
Using the Web also has disadvantages. Consumers can effectively screen out most messages.
Marketers may think their ads are more effective than they are if bogus clicks are generated by software-powered Web sites.18 Advertisers also lose some control over their online messages, which can
be hacked or vandalized.
But many feel the pros outweigh the cons, and the Web is attracting marketers of all kinds. Beauty
pioneer Estée Lauder, who said she relied on three means of communication to build her multimilliondollar cosmetics business—“telephone, telegraph, and tell a woman”—would now have to add the
Web, where the company’s official site describes new and old products, announces special offers
and promotions, and helps customers locate stores where they can buy Estée Lauder products.19
Marketers must go where the customers are, and increasingly that’s online. U.S. consumers go to
the Web over 25 percent of the time they spend with all media (see
Figure 19.1). Customers

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

Burger King

define the rules of engagement, however, and insulate themselves with the help of agents and intermediaries if they so choose. Customers define what information they need, what offerings they’re
interested in, and what they’re willing to pay.20
Online advertising continues to gain on traditional media. Total Internet ad spending is estimated to have grown to $26 billion in 2009 from $24 billion in 2008; TV advertising was estimated
to have dropped to $41 billion in 2009 from $52 billion in 2008. Helping fuel online growth is the
emergence of rich media ads that combine animation, video, and sound with interactive features.21
Consider what Burger King has done online.

Burger King

“If you have a global brand promise, ‘Have It Your Way,’” said Russ
Klein, Burger King’s former president for global marketing, strategy, and innovation, “it’s about
putting the customer in charge,” even if they say “bad things” about the brand. In competing
against McDonald’s, with its family-friendly image, “it’s more important for us to be provocative
than pleasant,” added Klein, especially when appealing to a market of mainly teenage boys.
Burger King’s brash ad campaigns—featuring its creepy bobble-head king and talking chicken—have appeared on YouTube and MySpace, so the company can take advantage of “social connectivity” as consumers
react to the ads. Burger King encourages customers to build online communities around their favorite company icons and products. To celebrate the 50th anniversary of its popular Whopper hamburger, the company
took over a Burger King restaurant in Las Vegas for a day and told people the Whopper had been permanently
removed from the menu. Customers’ outraged reactions were filmed as part of an award-winning campaign
dubbed “Whopper Freakout,” which served as the basis of TV ads and online videos. Over 5 million
consumers watched an 8-minute streaming video, another 14 million watched it or the TV spots on YouTube,
and millions more heard or read about it via PR or word of mouth.22

Interactive Marketing Communication Options
A company chooses which forms of interactive marketing will be most cost-effective in achieving
communication and sales objectives.23 Some of the main categories, discussed next, are: (1) Web
sites, (2) search ads, (3) display ads, and (4) e-mails. After summarizing some developments in
mobile marketing, we’ll describe social media and word-of-mouth effects.

WEB SITES Companies must design Web sites that embody or express their purpose, history,
products, and vision and that are attractive on first viewing and interesting enough to encourage
repeat visits.24 Jeffrey Rayport and Bernard Jaworski propose that effective sites feature seven design

Vividly demonstrating its customers’ loyalty, Burger King’s online “Whopper Freakout” videos became a viral hit.

541

542

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

|Fig. 19.2|

Seven Key Design
Elements of an
Effective Web Site

• Context. Layout and design
• Content. Text, pictures, sound, and video the site contains
• Community. How the site enables user-to-user communication
• Customization. Site’s ability to tailor itself to different users or to allow users to personalize the site
• Communication. How the site enables site-to-user, user-to-site, or two-way communication

Source: Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski,
e-commerce (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), p. 116.

• Connection. Degree that the site is linked to other sites
• Commerce. Site’s capabilities to enable commercial transactions

elements they call the 7Cs (see
Figure 19.2):25 To encourage repeat visits, companies must pay
special attention to context and content factors and embrace another “C”—constant change.26
Visitors will judge a site’s performance on ease of use and physical attractiveness.27 Ease of use
means: (1) The site downloads quickly, (2) the first page is easy to understand, and (3) it is easy to
navigate to other pages that open quickly. Physical attractiveness is assured when: (1) Individual
pages are clean and not crammed with content, (2) typefaces and font sizes are very readable, and
(3) the site makes good use of color (and sound).
Firms such as comScore and Nielsen Online track where consumers go online through page
views, unique visitors, length of visit, and so on.28 Companies must also be sensitive to online
security and privacy-protection issues.29
Besides their Web sites, companies may employ microsites, individual Web pages or clusters of
pages that function as supplements to a primary site. They’re particularly relevant for companies
selling low-interest products. People rarely visit an insurance company’s Web site, but the company
can create a microsite on used-car sites that offers advice for buyers of used cars and at the same
time a good insurance deal.

SEARCH ADS A hot growth area in interactive marketing is paid search or pay-per-click ads,
which now account for roughly half of all online ad spending.30 Thirty-five percent of all searches
are reportedly for products or services.
In paid search, marketers bid in a continuous auction on search terms that serve as a proxy for
the consumer’s product or consumption interests. When a consumer searches for any of the words
with Google, Yahoo!, or Bing, the marketer’s ad may appear above or next to the results, depending
on the amount the company bids and an algorithm the search engines use to determine an ad’s
relevance to a particular search.31
Advertisers pay only if people click on the links, but marketers believe consumers who have
already expressed interest by engaging in search are prime prospects. Average click-through is
about 2 percent, much more than for comparable online ads. The cost per click depends on how
high the link is ranked and the popularity of the keyword. The ever-increasing popularity of paid
search has increased competition among keyword bidders, significantly raising search prices
and putting a premium on choosing the best possible keywords, bidding on them strategically, and
monitoring the results for effectiveness and efficiency.
Search engine optimization has become a crucial part of marketing given the large amount of
money being spent by marketers on search. A number of guidelines have been suggested for more
effective search ads.32 Broader search terms are useful for general brand building; more specific
ones—for example, specifying a particular product model or service—are useful for generating and
converting sales leads. Search terms need to be spotlighted on the appropriate pages so search
engines can easily identify them. Multiple keywords are usually needed for any one product, but
each keyword must be bid for according to its likely return on revenue. It also helps to have popular sites link back to the site. Data can be collected to track the effects of paid search.
DISPLAY ADS Display ads or banner ads are small, rectangular boxes containing text and
perhaps a picture that companies pay to place on relevant Web sites.33 The larger the audience,
the higher the cost. Some banners are accepted on a barter basis. In the early days of the
Internet, viewers clicked on 2 percent to 3 percent of the banner ads they saw, but that
percentage quickly plummeted to as little as 0.25 percent and advertisers began to explore other
forms of communication.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

543

Given that Internet users spend only 5 percent of their time online actually searching for information, display ads still hold great promise compared to popular search ads. But ads need to be
more attention-getting and influential, better targeted, and more closely tracked.34
Interstitials are advertisements, often with video or animation, which pop up between changes
on a Web site. For example, ads for Johnson & Johnson’s Tylenol headache reliever would pop up
on brokers’ Web sites whenever the stock market fell by 100 points or more. Because consumers
find pop-up ads intrusive and distracting, many use software to block them.
A popular vehicle for advertising is podcasts, digital media files created for playback on portable MP3
players, laptops, or PCs. Sponsors pay roughly $25 per thousand listeners to run a 15- or 30-second
audio ad at the beginning of the podcast. Although these rates are higher than for popular radio shows,
podcasts are able to reach very specific market segments, and their popularity has grown.35

E-MAIL E-mail allows marketers to inform and communicate with customers at a fraction of the
cost of a “d-mail,” or direct mail, campaign. Consumers are besieged by e-mails, though, and many
employ spam filters. Some firms are asking consumers to say whether and when they would like to
receive emails. FTD, the flower retailer, allows customers to choose whether to receive e-mail
reminders to send flowers for virtually any holiday as well as specific birthdays and anniversaries.36
E-mails must be timely, targeted, and relevant. For example, the United Way of Massachusetts
Bay and Merrimack Valley used video-embedded e-mails to increase sign-ups for their events and
to cut costs. Videos were made one minute in length when testing revealed that two minutes was
too long but 30 seconds was too short.37 “Marketing Memo: How to Maximize the Marketing Value
of E-mails” provides some important guidelines for productive e-mail campaigns.

MOBILE MARKETING With cell phones’ ubiquitous nature and marketers’ ability to
personalize messages based on demographics and other consumer behavior characteristics (see
Chapter 15), the appeal of mobile marketing as a communication tool is obvious.38
With over 4.1 billion mobile subscribers in the world in 2009—there are more than twice as
many mobile phones in the world as personal computers—cell phones represent a major opportunity for advertisers to reach consumers on the “third screen” (TV and the computer are first and
second). Some firms are moving fast into m-space. One mobile pioneer in the banking industry is
Bank of America.39

marketing

Memo

How to Maximize the Marketing Value of E-mails

• Give the customer a reason to respond. Offer powerful incentives for
reading e-mail pitches and online ads, such as trivia games, scavenger
hunts, and instant-win sweepstakes.
• Personalize the content of your e-mails. Customers who agree to
receive IBM’s weekly iSource newsletter select “the news they choose”
from topics on an interest profile.
• Offer something the customer can’t get via direct mail. Because
e-mail campaigns can be carried out quickly, they can offer timesensitive information. Travelocity sends frequent e-mails pitching
last-minute cheap airfares, and Club Med pitches unsold vacation
packages at a discount.
• Make it easy for customers to “unsubscribe.” Online customers
demand a positive exit experience. Dissatisfied customers leaving on a
sour note are more likely to spread the displeasure to others.

• Combine with other communications such as social media. Southwest
Airlines found the highest number of reservations occur after an e-mail
campaign followed by a social media campaign. Papa John’s was able
to add 45,000 fans to its Facebook page through an e-mail campaign
inviting customers to participate in a “March Madness” NCAA basketball tournament contest.
To increase the effectiveness of e-mails, some researchers are employing “heat mapping,” by which they can measure what people read on a
computer screen by using cameras attached to a computer that track eye
movements. One study showed that clickable graphic icons and buttons that
linked to more details of a marketing offer increased click-through rates by
60 percent over links that used just an Internet address.

Sources: Richard Westlund, “Success Stories in eMail Marketing,” Adweek Special Advertising Section to Adweek, Brandweek, and Mediaweek, February 16, 2010; Suzanne
Vranica, “Marketers Give E-mail Another Look,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2006; Seth Godin, Permission Marketing: Turning Strangers into Friends and Friends into
Customers (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999).

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Bank of America

544

Bank of America

Bank of America is using mobile as a communication
channel and a means to provide banking solutions for the many ways its customers lead their
lives. More than 2 million of its 59 million customers use mobile banking applications, which the
bank credits as a significant drawing card given that 8 percent to 10 percent of these mobile
users are new customers. Initially targeting a younger group of users between 18 and 30 years
old—with special emphasis on college students—the bank’s mobile banking services increasingly appeal to
other groups such as older, higher-income users. Its smart-phone apps and traditional browser-based
solutions have been praised for clean navigation, ease of use, and reach. The branch and ATM locator, for
instance, is used by one in eight mobile customers. Mobile marketing is integrated all through the bank’s
marketing efforts: The Web site provides demos and tours of its mobile services; the TV campaigns stress the
benefits of its mobile banking. With one click on a mobile banner ad, smart-phone users can download the
free Bank of America app or just learn more about its mobile banking services.

•

•

VW launched its GTI model in
the United States with an iPhone
app for its Real Racing game.

Mobile marketing options. Mobile ad spending was almost $1 billion worldwide in 2009,
most of which went into SMS text messages and simple display ads. With the increased capabilities of smart phones, however, mobile ads can be more than just a display medium using
static “mini-billboards.”40
Much recent interest has been generated in mobile apps—“bite-sized” software programs
that can be loaded on to smart phones. In a short period of time, thousands were introduced
by companies large and small. VW chose to launch its GTI in the United States with an iPhone
app, receiving 2 million downloads in three weeks. In Europe, it launched the VW Tiguan with
a mobile app as well as text messages and an interstitial Web site.41
Smart phones also allow loyalty programs with which customers can track their visits and
purchases at a merchant and receive rewards.42 By tracking the location of receptive customers
who opt in to receive communications, retailers can send them location-specific promotions
when they are in proximity to shops or outlets. Sonic Corp. used GPS data and proximity to
cell towers in Atlanta to identify when those customers who had signed up for company communications were near one of roughly 50 Sonic restaurants in the area. When that was the
case, Sonic sent customers a text message with a discount offer or an ad to entice them to visit
the restaurant.43
With traditional coupon redemption rates declining for years, the ability of cell phones to
permit more relevant and timely offers to consumers at or near the point of purchase has
piqued the interest of many marketers. These new coupons can take all forms; digital in-store
signs can now dispense them to smart phones.44
Developing mobile marketing programs. Even with newer generation smart phones, the Web
experience can be very different for users given smaller screen sizes, longer downloads, and the
lack of some software capabilities (such as Adobe Flash Player on iPhones). Marketers would
be wise to design simple, clear, and “clean” sites, paying even greater attention than usual to
user experience and navigation.45
U.S. marketers can learn much about mobile marketing by looking overseas. In developed Asian markets such as Hong Kong, Japan,
Singapore, and South Korea, mobile marketing is fast becoming a
central component of customer experiences.46 In developing markets, high cell phone penetration also makes mobile marketing attractive. A pioneer in China, Coca-Cola created a national campaign
asking Beijing residents to send text messages guessing the high temperature in the city every day for just over a month, for a chance to
win a one-year supply of Coke products. The campaign attracted
more than 4 million messages over the course of 35 days.47
Although a growing population segment uses mobile phones for
everything from entertainment to banking, different people have
different attitudes and experiences with mobile technology.
“Marketing Memo: Segmenting Tech Users” profiles the role of mobile Internet access in several groups’ digital lifestyles.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

marketing

545

Segmenting Tech Users

Memo
Group
Name

| CHAPTER 19

% of Adults

What You Need to Know About Them

Key Demographic Facts

Motivated by Mobility (39%)
Digital Collaborators

8%

With the most tech assets, Digital Collaborators use them to work
with and share their creations with others. They are enthusiastic
about how ICTs help them connect with others and confident
in how to manage digital devices and information.

Mostly male (56%), late 30s,
well-educated, and well-off.

Ambivalent
Networkers

7%

Ambivalent Networkers have folded mobile devices into how they run
their social lives, whether through texting or social networking tools
online. They also rely on ICTs for entertainment. But they also express
worries about connectivity; some find that mobile devices are intrusive
and many think it is good to take a break from online use.

Primarily male (60%), they are
young (late 20s) and ethnically
diverse.

Media Movers

7%

Media Movers have a wide range of online and mobile habits, and
they are bound to find or create an information nugget, such as a
digital photo, and pass it on. These social exchanges are central to
this group’s use of ICTs. Cyberspace, as a path to personal
productivity or an outlet for creativity, is less important.

Males (56%) in their mid-30s,
many with children and in
middle income range.

Roving Nodes

9%

Roving Nodes are active managers of their social and work lives using
their mobile device. They get the most out of basic applications with
their assets such as e-mail or texting and find them great for arranging
the logistics of their lives and enhancing personal productivity.

Mostly women (56%), in their
late 30s, well educated and
well-off.

Mobile Newbies

8%

This group rates low on tech assets, but its members really like their
cell phones. Mobile Newbies, many of whom acquired a cell in the
past year, like how the device helps them be more available to others.
They would be hard pressed to give up the cell phone.

Mainly women (55%), about age
50, lower educational and
income levels.

Stationary Media Majority (61%)
Desktop Veterans

13%

This group of older, veteran online users is content to use a high-speed
connection and a desktop computer to explore the Internet and stay in
touch with friends, placing their cell phone and mobile applications in
the background.

Mainly men (55%), in their mid
40s, well-educated and well-off
economically.

Drifting Surfers

14%

Many have the requisite tech assets, such as broadband or a cell
phone, but Drifting Surfers are infrequent online users. When they use
technology, it is for basic information gathering. It wouldn’t bother the
typical Drifting Surfer to give up the Internet or a cell phone.

Majority women (56%), in their
early 40s, middle income, and
average education levels.

Information
Encumbered

10%

Most people in this group suffer from information overload and think
taking time off from the Internet is a good thing. The Information
Encumbered are firmly rooted in old media to get information.

Two-thirds men, in their early
50s, average education,
lower-middle income.

Tech Indifferent

10%

Members of this group are not heavy Internet users and although
most have cell phones, they don’t like their intrusiveness. The
Indifferent could easily do without modern gadgets and services.

Mainly women (55%), in their
late 50s, low-income and
education levels.

Off the Network

14%

Members of this group have neither cell phones nor online access, and
tend to be older and low-income. But a few have experience with ICTs;
some used to have online access and as many as one in five used to
have a cell phone.

Low-income senior women, high
share of African Americans.

Source: “The Mobile Difference—Tech User Types,” Pew Internet & American Life Project, March 31, 2009, www.pewinternet.org/Infographics/The-Mobile-Difference—
Tech-User-Types.aspx.

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Word of Mouth
Consumers use word of mouth to talk about dozens of brands each day, from media and entertainment
products such as movies, TV shows, and publications to food products, travel services, and retail stores.48
Companies are acutely aware of the power of word of mouth. Hush Puppies shoes, Krispy
Kreme doughnuts, the blockbuster movie The Passion of the Christ, and, more recently, Crocs shoes
have been built through strong word of mouth, as were companies such as The Body Shop, Palm,
Red Bull, Starbucks, and Amazon.com.
Positive word of mouth sometimes happens organically with little advertising, but it can also be
managed and facilitated.49 It is particularly effective for smaller businesses, with whom customers
may feel a more personal relationship. Many small businesses are investing in various forms of
social media at the expense of newspapers, radio, and Yellow Pages to get the word out. Southern
Jewelz, started by a recent college grad, found sales doubling over six months after it began to
actively use Facebook, Twitter, and e-commerce software.50
With the growth of social media, as Chapter 17 noted, marketers sometimes distinguish paid
media from earned or free media. Although different points of view prevail, paid media results
from press coverage of company-generated advertising, publicity, or other promotional efforts.
Earned media—sometimes called free media—is all the PR benefits a firm receives without having
directly paid for anything—all the news stories, blogs, social network conversations that deal with a
brand. Earned media isn’t literally free—the company has to invest in products, services, and their
marketing to some degree to get people to pay attention and write and talk about them, but the
expenses are not devoted to eliciting a media response.
We first consider how social media promotes the flow of word of mouth before delving into
more detail on how word of mouth is formed and travels. To start our discussion, consider some of
the different ways Intuit uses social media.51

Intuit

Always a marketing pioneer in the software industry, Intuit has received much
recognition for its extensive social media programs. Intuit adopted a narrowcasting approach
with its QuickBooks Live Community, which serves the small business market: It is available
only to customers who buy QuickBooks 2009 on a PC or a Mac and is a place where customers
can trade tips and ask questions, 70 percent of which are answered by other QuickBooks customers. One accountant has posted 5,600 answers on the site. The community also provides Intuit with
useful product feedback. Intuit has run TurboTax contests to encourage product placement in Facebook,
MySpace, and Twitter. Users with the most “original and unique” status updates related to TurboTax receive
prizes. Intuit’s “Love a Local Business” program awards $1,000 grants to local businesses based on the
community’s online votes. A variety of other social networking events help Intuit interact with small businesses. As one social media expert at the company said: “Social media is one of the key trends driving our
business . . . It’s about fast connections with customers and building an on-going relationship.”
Intuit

546

Social Media
Social media are a means for consumers to share text, images, audio, and video information with
each other and with companies and vice versa. Social media allow marketers to establish a public
voice and presence on the Web and reinforce other communication activities. Because of their dayto-day immediacy, they can also encourage companies to stay innovative and relevant.
There are three main platforms for social media: (1) online communities and forums, (2) bloggers (individuals and networks such as Sugar and Gawker), and (3) social networks (like Facebook,
Twitter, and YouTube).

ONLINE COMMUNITIES AND FORUMS Online communities and forums come in all
shapes and sizes. Many are created by consumers or groups of consumers with no commercial
interests or company affiliations. Others are sponsored by companies whose members
communicate with the company and with each other through postings, instant messaging, and chat
discussions about special interests related to the company’s products and brands. These online
communities and forums can be a valuable resource for companies and provide multiple functions
by both collecting and conveying key information.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

547

A technology marketing pioneer,
Intuit created a strong online
brand community for its
QuickBooks software product.

A key for success of online communities is to create individual and group activities that help
form bonds among community members. The Idea Center at Kodak Gallery is an online community for exchanging ideas about how to use Kodak products to create personalized gifts and other
creative products using digital photos. Kodak has found that peer-to-peer recommendations
within the community led to more frequent, larger purchases.52 Apple hosts a large number of discussion groups organized by product lines and also by consumer versus professional use. These
groups are customers’ primary source of product information after warranties expire.
Information flow in online communities and forums is two-way and can provide companies
with useful, hard-to-get customer information and insights. When GlaxoSmithKline prepared to
launch its first weight-loss drug, Alli, it sponsored a weight-loss community. The firm felt the feedback it gained was more valuable than what it could have received from traditional focus groups.
Research has shown, however, that firms should avoid too much democratization of innovation.
Groundbreaking ideas can be replaced by lowest-common-denominator solutions.53

BLOGS Blogs, regularly updated online journals or diaries, have become an important outlet for
word of mouth. There are millions in existence and they vary widely, some personal for close
friends and families, others designed to reach and influence a vast audience. One obvious appeal of
blogs is bringing together people with common interests. Blog networks such as Gawker Media
offer marketers a portfolio of choices. Online celebrity gossip blog PopSugar has spawned a family
of breezy blogs on fashion (FabSugar), beauty (BellaSugar), and romance and culture (TrèsSugar),
attracting women aged 18 to 49.54
Corporations are creating their own blogs and carefully monitoring those of others.55 Blog
search engines provide up-to-the-minute analysis of millions of blogs to find out what’s on people’s
minds.56 Popular blogs are creating influential opinion leaders. At the TreeHugger site, a team of
bloggers tracks green consumer products for 3.5 million unique visitors per month, offering video
and reference guides and an average of 35 daily posts.57
Because many consumers examine product information and reviews contained in blogs, the
Federal Trade Commission has also taken steps to require bloggers to disclose their relationship
with marketers whose products they endorse. At the other extreme, some consumers use blogs and
videos as a means of retribution and revenge on companies for bad service and faulty products.
Dell’s customer-service shortcomings were splashed all over the Internet through a series of “Dell
Hell” postings. AOL took some heat when a frustrated customer recorded and broadcast online a
service representative’s emphatic resistance to canceling his service. Comcast was embarrassed
when a video surfaced of one of its technicians sleeping on a customer’s couch.58

548

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

The TreeHugger Web site tracks
blogs and Internet activity with
respect to green products.

SOCIAL NETWORKS Social networks have become an important force in both business-to-

CafeMom

consumer and business-to-business marketing.59 Major ones include Facebook, which is the
world’s biggest; MySpace, which concentrates on music and entertainment; LinkedIn, which targets
career-minded professionals; and Twitter, which allows members to network via 140-character
messages or “tweets.” Different networks offer different benefits to firms. For example, Twitter can
be an early warning system that permits rapid response, whereas Facebook allows deeper dives to
engage consumers in more meaningful ways.60
Marketers are still learning how to best tap into social networks and their huge, well-defined audiences. Given networks’ noncommercial nature—users are generally there looking to connect with
others—attracting attention and persuading are more challenging. Also, given that users generate their
own content, ads may find themselves appearing beside inappropriate or even offensive content.61
Advertising is only one avenue, however. Like any individual, companies can also join the social
groups and actively participate. Having a Facebook page has become a virtual prerequisite for many
companies. Twitter can benefit even the smallest firm. To create interest in its products and the
events it hosted, small San Francisco bakery Mission Pie began to send tweet alerts, quickly gaining
1,000 followers and a sizable up-tick in business. “Follow Me on Twitter” signs are appearing on
doors and windows of more small shops.62
And although major social networks offer the most exposure, niche networks provide a more
targeted market that may be more likely to spread the brand message, as with CafeMom.63

CafeMom Started in 2006 by parent company CMI Marketing, CafeMom has

6.7 million unique visitors per month on Cafemom.com and 18 million on boutique ad network
CafeMom plus. Visitors participate in dozens of different forums for moms. When the site
started a forum for discussing developmentally appropriate play activities, toymaker Playskool
sent toy kits to over 5,000 members and encouraged them to share their experiences with
each other, resulting in 11,600 posts at Playskool Preschool Playgroup. “The great thing is you get direct
feedback from actual moms,” says the director of media at Hasbro, Playskool’s parent company. This kind
of feedback can be invaluable in the product-development process as well. The site’s sweet spot is young,
middle-class women with kids who love the opportunity to make friends and seek support, spending an
average of 44 minutes a day on the site.

USING SOCIAL MEDIA Social media allow consumers to become engaged with a brand at
perhaps a deeper and broader level than ever before. Marketers should do everything they can to
encourage willing consumers to engage productively. But as useful as they may be, social media can
never become the sole source of marketing communications.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

549

Embracing social media, harnessing word of mouth, and creating buzz requires companies to take
the good with the bad. Look what happened to the marketers of Motrin at Johnson & Johnson.64

Motrin When marketers at J&J decided to run a slightly tongue-in-cheek online Web
video for Motrin implying that young mothers carrying their babies everywhere in slings and
chest packs as a means of bonding—or perhaps just to be trendy—were inadvertently risking
back pain, they had no idea the pain they would in fact experience. After the ad ran online for
several weeks without notice, a few vocal mothers took offense on Twitter on a Friday night, creating a weekend firestorm that stretched all over the Web. On the following Monday, marketers for Motrin
quickly took to e-mail to personally apologize and replaced the video with a broader message of apology. Then
they were criticized for caving in to pressure and overreacting.
The negative online response to
Motrin's new ad posed a significant social media challenge to
the brand.

The Motrin example shows the power and speed of social media, but also the challenges they
pose to companies. The reality, however, is that whether a company chooses to engage in social media or not, the Internet will always permit scrutiny, criticism, and even “cheap shots” from consumers and organizations. By using social media and the Web in a constructive, thoughtful way,
firms at least have a means to create a strong online presence and better offer credible alternative
points of view if such events occur.65

Buzz and Viral Marketing
Some marketers highlight two particular forms of word of mouth—buzz and viral marketing.66
Buzz marketing generates excitement, creates publicity, and conveys new relevant brand-related information through unexpected or even outrageous means.67 Viral marketing is another form of
word of mouth, or “word of mouse,” that encourages consumers to pass along company-developed
products and services or audio, video, or written information to others online.68
With user-generated content sites such as YouTube, MySpace Video, and Google Video, consumers and advertisers can upload ads and videos to be shared virally by millions of people. Online
videos can be cost-effective—costing $50,000 to $200,000—and marketers can take more freedoms
with them.

550

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Blendtec

Utah-based Blendtec used to be known primarily for its commercial
blenders and food mills. The company wasn’t really familiar to the general public until it launched
a hilarious series of “Will It Blend?” online videos to promote some of its commercial products for
home use. The videos feature founder and CEO Tom Dickson wearing a white lab coat and pulverizing objects ranging from golf balls and pens to beer bottles, all in a genial but deadpan manner. The genius of the videos (www.willitblend.com) is that they tie into current events. As soon as the iPhone
was launched with huge media fanfare, Blendtec aired a video in which Dickson smiled and said, “I love my
iPhone. It does everything. But will it blend?” After the blender crushed the iPhone to bits, Dickson lifted the lid
on the small pile of black dust and said simply, “iSmoke.” The clip drew more than 3.5 million downloads on
YouTube. Dickson has appeared on the Today and other network television shows and has had a cameo in a
Weezer video. One of the few items not to blend: A crowbar!69
Blendtec’s classic “Will It Blend?”
online videos created significant
brand equity for a brand that was
previously fairly unknown.

BzzAgent

Outrageousness is a two-edged sword. The Blendtec Web site clearly puts its comic videos in the
“Don’t try this at home” category and another set showing how to grind up vegetables for soup, for
instance, in the “Do try this at home” category.
Contrary to popular opinion, products don’t have to be outrageous or edgy to generate buzz.
Companies can help to create buzz; and media or advertising are not always necessary for buzz to
occur.70 Some agencies have been created solely to help clients create buzz. P&G has 225,000 teens
enlisted in Tremor and 600,000 mothers enrolled in Vocalpoint. Both groups are built on the premise
that certain individuals want to learn about products, receive samples and coupons, share their opinions
with companies, and, of course, talk up their experiences with others. P&G chooses well-connected
people—the Vocalpoint moms have big social networks and generally speak to 25 to 30 other women
during the day, compared to an average of 5 for other moms—and their messages carry a strong
reason to share product information with a friend.71 BzzAgent is another buzz-building firm.72

BzzAgent Boston-based BzzAgent has assembled an international word-of-mouth
media network powered by 600,000 demographically diverse—but essentially ordinary—
people who volunteer to talk up any of the clients’ products they deem worth promoting. The
company pairs consumers with products, information, and digital tools to activate widespread
opinion-sharing throughout its own social media site, called BzzScapes, and within each

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

member’s personal social circles. BzzAgent believes this unique combination of people and platform accelerates measurable word of mouth and fosters sustained brand advocacy. BzzAgent participants have
spread their own personal views and opinions to nearly 100 million friends and family. Each time an agent
completes an activity, he or she is expected to file a report describing the nature of the buzz and its effectiveness. The company claims the buzz is honest because the process requires just enough work that few
agents enroll solely for freebies, and agents don’t talk up products they don’t like. Agents are also
supposed to disclose they’re connected to BzzAgent. The company has completed hundreds of projects,
working with clients such as Levi’s Dockers, Anheuser-Busch, Cadbury-Schweppes, V Guide, Bacardi,
Dunkin’ Donuts, Silk, Tropicana Pure, Mrs. Dash, and the publishers of Freakonomics and Eats, Shoots and
Leaves, both bestsellers.
Buzz and viral marketing both try to create a splash in the marketplace to showcase a brand and
its noteworthy features. Some believe these influences are driven more by the rules of entertainment than the rules of selling. Consider these examples: Quicksilver puts out surfing videos and
surf-culture books for teens, Johnson & Johnson and Pampers both have popular Web sites with
parenting advice for babies; Walmart places videos with money-saving tips on YouTube; Grey
Goose vodka has an entire entertainment division; Mountain Dew has a record label; and Hasbro is
joining forces with Discovery to create a TV channel.73 Ultimately, however, the success of any viral
or buzz campaign depends on the willingness of consumers to talk to other consumers.74

Opinion Leaders
Communication researchers propose a social-structure view of interpersonal communication.75
They see society as consisting of cliques, small groups whose members interact frequently. Clique
members are similar, and their closeness facilitates effective communication but also insulates the
clique from new ideas. The challenge is to create more openness so cliques exchange information
with others in society. This openness is helped along by people who function as liaisons and connect two or more cliques without belonging to either, and by bridges, people who belong to one
clique and are linked to a person in another.
Best-selling author Malcolm Gladwell claims three factors work to ignite public interest in an
idea.76 According to the first, “The Law of the Few,” three types of people help to spread an idea
like an epidemic. First are Mavens, people knowledgeable about big and small things. Second are
Connectors, people who know and communicate with a great number of other people. Third are
Salesmen, who possess natural persuasive power. Any idea that catches the interest of Mavens,
Connectors, and Salesmen is likely to be broadcast far and wide. The second factor is
“Stickiness.” An idea must be expressed so that it motivates people to act. Otherwise, “The Law of
the Few” will not lead to a self-sustaining epidemic. Finally, the third factor, “The Power of
Context,” controls whether those spreading an idea are able to organize groups and communities
around it.
Not everyone agrees with Gladwell’s ideas.77 One team of viral marketing experts caution that
although influencers or “alphas” start trends, they are often too introspective and socially alienated
to spread them. They advise marketers to cultivate “bees,” hyperdevoted customers who are not just
satisfied knowing about the next trend but live to spread the word.78 More firms are in fact finding
ways to actively engage their passionate brand evangelists. LEGO’s Ambassador Program targets its
most enthusiastic followers for brainstorming and feedback.79
Companies can stimulate personal influence channels to work on their behalf. “Marketing
Memo: How to Start a Buzz Fire” describes some techniques. Companies can also trace online activity to identify more influential users who may function as opinion leaders.80
Consumers can resent personal communications if unsolicited. Some word-of-mouth tactics
walk a fine line between acceptable and unethical. One controversial tactic, sometimes called shill
marketing or stealth marketing, pays people to anonymously promote a product or service in public
places without disclosing their financial relationship to the sponsoring firm. To launch its T681
mobile camera phone, Sony Ericsson hired actors dressed as tourists to approach people at tourist
locations and ask to have their photo taken. Handing over the mobile phone created an opportunity to discuss its merits, but many found the deception distasteful.81 Heineken took another tack
and turned an admittedly deceptive stunt into a huge PR win.82

| CHAPTER 19

551

552

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

marketing
How to Start a Buzz Fire

Memo

Although many word-of-mouth effects are beyond marketers’ control,
certain steps improve the likelihood of starting a positive buzz.

Weight Watchers found that word-of-mouth referrals from someone in
the program had a huge impact on business.

• Identify influential individuals and companies and devote extra effort to
them. In technology, influencers might be large corporate customers,
industry analysts and journalists, selected policy makers, and a sampling of early adopters.

• Provide compelling information that customers want to pass along.
Companies shouldn’t communicate with customers in terms better
suited for a press release. Make it easy and desirable for a customer to
borrow elements from an e-mail message or blog. Information should be
original and useful. Originality increases the amount of word of mouth,
but usefulness determines whether it will be positive or negative.

• Supply key people with product samples. When two pediatricians launched
MD Moms to market baby skin care products, they liberally sampled the
product to physicians and mothers hoping for mentions on Internet message boards and parenting Web sites.The strategy worked—the company
hit year one distribution goals by the end of the first month.
• Work through community influentials such as local disk jockeys, class
presidents, and presidents of women’s organizations. Ford’s prelaunch
“Fiesta Movement” campaign invited 100 handpicked young adults or
“millennials” to live with the Fiesta car for six months. People were chosen based on their online experience with blogging and social friends
and a video they submitted about their desire for adventure. After six
months, the campaign had 4.3 million YouTube views, over 500,000
Flickr views, over 3 million Twitter impressions, and 50,000 potential
customers, 97 percent of whom didn’t already own a Ford.83
• Develop word-of-mouth referral channels to build business.
Professionals will often encourage clients to recommend their services.

Ford Fiesta used 100 young adult consumers to provide
an online, real-life preview of its new car.

Heineken

Sources: Matthew Dolan, “Ford Takes Online Gamble with New Fiesta,” Wall Street Journal, April 8, 2009; Sarit Moldovan, Jacob Goldenberg, and Amitava Chattopadhyay,
“What Drives Word of Mouth? The Roles of Product Originality and Usefulness,” MSI Report No. 06-111 (Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 2006); Karen J. Bannan,
“Online Chat Is a Grapevine That Yields Precious Fruit,” New York Times, December 25, 2006; John Batelle, “The Net of Influence,” Business 2.0 (March 2004): 70; Ann Meyer,
“Word-of-Mouth Marketing Speaks Well for Small Business,” Chicago Tribune, July 28, 2003; Malcolm Macalister Hall, “Selling by Stealth,” Business Life (November 2001),
pp. 51–55.

Heineken Nothing may be more important to young European adult males than

soccer—which they call football. Heineken took advantage of that fact to stage a fake classical
musical concert at the same time as a crucial Real Madrid versus AC Milan match, enlisting girlfriends, bosses, and professors as accomplices in the hoax. Over 1,000 passionate AC Milan
fans reluctantly showed up at the theater with their companions for the performance. As the
string quarter began to play and the soccer fans squirmed, words on a screen behind the musicians slowly
revealed clues about the nature of the prank and then showed the game in all its big-screen glory. Over
1.5 million people watched the audience reactions on live SkySport TV, and the Heineken site devoted to the
event received 5 million visitors. Subsequent PR and word of mouth made it a worldwide phenomenon.

Measuring the Effects of Word of Mouth84
Research and consulting firm Keller Fay notes that although 80 percent of word of mouth occurs
offline, many marketers concentrate on online effects given the ease of tracking them through
advertising, PR, or digital agencies.85 Gatorade created a “Mission Control Center”—set up like a
broadcast television control room—to monitor the brand on social networks around the clock.
Through demographic information or proxies and cookies, firms can monitor when customers
blog, comment, post, share, link, upload, friend, stream, write on a wall, or update a profile. With
these tracking tools it is possible, for example, to sell movie advertisers “1 million American women
between the ages of 14 and 24 who had uploaded, blogged, rated, shared, or commented on entertainment in the previous 24 hours.”86

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

553

DuPont employs measures of online word of mouth such as campaign scale (how far it reached),
speed (how fast it spread), share of voice in that space, share of voice in that speed, whether it
achieved positive lift in sentiment, whether the message was understood, whether it was relevant,
whether it had sustainability (and was not a one-shot deal), and how far it moved from its source.
Other researchers focus more on characterizing the source of word of mouth. For example, one
group is looking to evaluate blogs according to three dimensions: relevance, sentiment, and authority.87

Designing the Sales Force
The original and oldest form of direct marketing is the field sales call. To locate prospects, develop
them into customers, and grow the business, most industrial companies rely heavily on a professional sales force or hire manufacturers’ representatives and agents. Many consumer companies
such as Allstate, Amway, Avon, Mary Kay, Merrill Lynch, and Tupperware use a direct-selling force.
U.S. firms spend over a trillion dollars annually on sales forces and sales force materials—more
than on any other promotional method. Over 10 percent of the total workforce work full time in
sales occupations, both nonprofit and for profit.88 Hospitals and museums, for example, use fundraisers to contact donors and solicit donations. For many firms, sales force performance is critical.89

SoBe

John Bello, founder of SoBe nutritionally enhanced teas and juices, has given
much credit to his sales force for the brand’s successful ascent. Bello claims that the superior
quality and consistent sales effort from the 150 salespeople the company had at its peak was
directed toward one simple goal: “SoBe won in the street because our salespeople were there
more often and in greater numbers than the competition, and they were more motivated by far.”
SoBe’s sales force operated at every level of the distribution chain: At the distributor level, steady communication gave SoBe disproportionate focus relative to the other brands; at the trade level, with companies such
as 7-Eleven, Costco, and Safeway, most senior salespeople had strong
personal relationships; and at the individual store level, the SoBe team was
always at work setting and restocking shelves, cutting in product, and putting up point-of-sale displays. According to Bello, bottom-line success in
any entrepreneurial endeavor depends on sales execution.
Although no one debates the importance of the sales force in
marketing programs, companies are sensitive to the high and rising
costs of maintaining one, including salaries, commissions, bonuses,
travel expenses, and benefits. Not surprisingly, companies are trying
to increase sales force productivity through better selection, training,
supervision, motivation, and compensation.90
The term sales representative covers six positions, ranging from
the least to the most creative types of selling:91
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

Deliverer—A salesperson whose major task is the delivery of a
product (water, fuel, oil).
Order taker—An inside order taker (standing behind the counter) or outside order taker
(calling on the supermarket manager).
Missionary—A salesperson not permitted to take an order but expected rather to build
goodwill or educate the actual or potential user (the medical “detailer” representing an ethical pharmaceutical house).
Technician—A salesperson with a high level of technical knowledge (the engineering salesperson
who is primarily a consultant to client companies).
Demand creator—A salesperson who relies on creative methods for selling tangible products
(vacuum cleaners, cleaning brushes, household products) or intangibles (insurance, advertising
services, or education).
Solution vendor—A salesperson whose expertise is solving a customer’s problem, often
with a system of the company’s products and services (for example, computer and communications systems).

An essential ingredient to SoBe’s
initial beverage market success
was a highly motivated and skilled
sales force.

554

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Designing the
Sales Force

Salespeople are the company’s personal link to its customers. In designing the sales force, the
company must develop sales force objectives, strategy, structure, size, and compensation (see
Figure 19.3).

Sales Force Objectives and Strategy
Sales force
objectives

Sales force
strategy

Sales force
structure

Sales force
size

Sales force
compensation

|Fig. 19.3|

Designing a Sales
Force
|Fig. 19.4|

A Hypothetical
(Dysfunctional) Sales
Marketing Exchange
Source: Based on a talk by Scott Sanderude and
Jeff Standish, “Work Together, Win Together:
Resolving Misconceptions between Sales and
Marketing,” talk given at Marketing Science
Institute’s Marketing, Sales, and Customers
conference, December 7, 2005.

The days when all the sales force did was “sell, sell, and sell” are long gone. Sales reps need to know
how to diagnose a customer’s problem and propose a solution that can help improve the customer’s
profitability.
Companies need to define specific sales force objectives. For example, a company might want its
sales representatives to spend 80 percent of their time with current customers and 20 percent with
prospects, and 85 percent of their time on established products and 15 percent on new products.
Regardless of the selling context, salespeople perform one or more specific tasks:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Prospecting. Searching for prospects or leads
Targeting. Deciding how to allocate their time among prospects and customers
Communicating. Communicating information about the company’s products and services
Selling. Approaching, presenting, answering questions, overcoming objections, and closing sales
Servicing. Providing various services to the customers—consulting on problems, rendering
technical assistance, arranging financing, expediting delivery
Information gathering. Conducting market research and doing intelligence work
Allocating. Deciding which customers will get scarce products during product shortages

To manage costs, most companies are choosing a leveraged sales force that focuses reps on selling
the company’s more complex and customized products to large accounts and uses inside salespeople
and Web ordering for low-end selling. Salespeople handle fewer accounts and are rewarded for key
account growth; lead generation, proposal writing, order fulfillment, and postsale support are
turned over to others. This is far different from expecting salespeople to sell to every possible
account, the common weakness of geographically based sales forces.92
Companies must deploy sales forces strategically so they call on the right customers at the right
time in the right way, acting as “account managers” who arrange fruitful contact between people in
the buying and selling organizations. Selling increasingly calls for teamwork and the support of
others, such as top management, especially when national accounts or major sales are at stake;
technical people, who supply information and service before, during, and after product purchase;
customer service representatives, who provide installation, maintenance, and other services; and
office staff, consisting of sales analysts, order expediters, and assistants.93
To maintain a market focus, salespeople should know how to analyze sales data, measure market
potential, gather market intelligence, and develop marketing strategies and plans. Especially at the
higher levels of sales management, they need analytical marketing skills. Marketers believe sales forces
are more effective in the long run if they understand and appreciate marketing as well as selling. Too
often marketing and sales are in conflict: the sales force complains marketing isn’t generating enough
leads and marketers complain the sales force isn’t converting them (see
Figure 19.4). Improved
collaboration and communication between these two can increase revenues and profits.94

Sales: I need leads, but marketing never sends me any good leads. How am I supposed to get new business
with no good leads?
Marketing: We deliver tons of leads and they just sit in the system. Why won’t sales call on any of them?
Sales: I have nothing new to sell. What is marketing doing? Why can’t they figure out what customers want
before they give it to us? Why don’t they give me anything that’s easy to sell?
Marketing: Why won’t sales get out and sell my new programs? How do they expect customers to place orders
without sales contacts?
Sales: My people spend too much time on administration and paperwork. I need them out selling.
Marketing: We need information to get new ideas. How long does it take to type in a few words? Don’t they
know their own customers?
Sales: How am I going to hit my number? Marketing is a waste of time. I’d rather have more sales reps.
Marketing: How am I going to hit my number? Sales won’t help and I don’t have enough people to do it myself.

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

| CHAPTER 19

555

Once the company chooses its strategy, it can use a direct or a contractual sales force. A direct (company) sales force consists of full- or part-time paid employees who work exclusively for the company.
Inside sales personnel conduct business from the office using the telephone and receive visits from
prospective buyers, and field sales personnel travel and visit customers. A contractual sales force consists of manufacturers’ reps, sales agents, and brokers, who earn a commission based on sales.

Sales Force Structure
The sales force strategy also has implications for its structure. A company that sells one product line
to one end-using industry with customers in many locations would use a territorial structure. A
company that sells many products to many types of customers might need a product or market
structure. Some companies need a more complex structure. Motorola, for example, manages four
types of sales forces: (1) a strategic market sales force composed of technical, applications, and
quality engineers and service personnel assigned to major accounts; (2) a geographic sales force
calling on thousands of customers in different territories; (3) a distributor sales force calling on and
coaching Motorola distributors; and (4) an inside sales force doing telemarketing and taking orders
via phone and fax.
Established companies need to revise their sales force structures as market and economic conditions
change. SAS, seller of business intelligence software, reorganized its sales force into industry-specific
groups such as banks, brokerages, and insurers and saw revenue soar by 14 percent.95 “Marketing
Insight: Major Account Management” discusses a specialized form of sales force structure.

Marketing Insight
Major Account Management
Marketers typically single out for attention major accounts (also called
key accounts, national accounts, global accounts, or house accounts).
These are important customers with multiple divisions in many locations who use uniform pricing and coordinated service for all divisions.
A major account manager (MAM) usually reports to the national sales
manager and supervises field reps calling on customer plants within
their territories. The average company manages about 75 key
accounts. If a company has several such accounts, it’s likely to organize
a major account management division, in which the average MAM
handles nine accounts.
Large accounts are often handled by a strategic account management team with cross-functional members who integrate new-product
development, technical support, supply chain, marketing activities, and
multiple communication channels to cover all aspects of the relationship. Procter & Gamble has a strategic account management team of
300 staffers to work with Walmart in its Bentonville, Arkansas, headquarters, with more stationed at Walmart headquarters in Europe, Asia,
and Latin America. P&G has credited this relationship with saving the
company billions of dollars.

Major account management is growing. As buyer concentration increases through mergers and acquisitions, fewer buyers are accounting
for a larger share of sales. Many are centralizing their purchases of certain items, gaining more bargaining power. And as products become
more complex, more groups in the buyer’s organization participate in
the purchase process. The typical salesperson might not have the skill,
authority, or coverage to sell effectively to the large buyer.
In selecting major accounts, companies look for those that purchase a high volume (especially of more profitable products), purchase
centrally, require a high level of service in several geographic locations,
may be price sensitive, and want a long-term partnership. Major
account managers act as the single point of contact, develop and grow
customer business, understand customer decision processes, identify
added-value opportunities, provide competitive intelligence, negotiate
sales, and orchestrate customer service.
Many major accounts look for added value more than a price advantage. They appreciate having a single point of dedicated contact; single
billing; special warranties; EDI links; priority shipping; early information
releases; customized products; and efficient maintenance, repair, and
upgraded service. And there’s the value of goodwill. Personal relationships
with people who value the major account’s business and have a vested interest in its success are compelling reasons for remaining a loyal customer.
Sources: Noel Capon, Dave Potter, and Fred Schindler, Managing Global Accounts: Nine
Critical Factors for a World-Class Program, 2nd ed. (Bronxville, NY: Wessex Press, 2008);
Peter Cheverton, Global Account Management: A Complete Action Kit of Tools and Techniques
for Managing Key Global Customers (London, UK: Kogan Page, 2008); Malcolm
McDonald and Diana Woodburn, Key Account Management: The Definitive Guide, 2nd ed.
(Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007); Jack Neff, “Bentonville or Bust,”
Advertising Age, February 24, 2003. More information can be obtained from SAMA
(Strategic Account Management Association) and the Journal of Selling and Major
Account Management.

556

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Sales Force Size
Sales representatives are one of the company’s most productive and expensive assets. Increasing their
number increases both sales and costs. Once the company establishes the number of customers it
wants to reach, it can use a workload approach to establish sales force size. This method has five steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Managing the
Sales Force

Group customers into size classes according to annual sales volume.
Establish desirable call frequencies (number of calls on an account per year) for each customer class.
Multiply the number of accounts in each size class by the corresponding call frequency to
arrive at the total workload for the country, in sales calls per year.
Determine the average number of calls a sales representative can make per year.
Divide the total annual calls required by the average annual calls made by a sales representative,
to arrive at the number of sales representatives needed.

Suppose the company estimates it has 1,000 A accounts and 2,000 B accounts. A accounts
require 36 calls a year, and B accounts require 12, so the company needs a sales force that can make
60,000 sales calls (36,000 + 24,000) a year. If the average full-time rep can make 1,000 calls a year,
the company needs 60.

Sales Force Compensation
Recruiting
and selecting
sales
representatives

Training
sales
representatives

Supervising
sales
representatives

Motivating
sales
representatives

Evaluating
sales
representatives

To attract top-quality reps, the company must develop an attractive compensation package. Sales
reps want income regularity, extra reward for above-average performance, and fair pay for experience and longevity. Management wants control, economy, and simplicity. Some of these objectives
will conflict. No wonder compensation plans exhibit a tremendous variety from industry to industry and even within the same industry.
The company must quantify four components of sales force compensation. The fixed amount, a
salary, satisfies the need for income stability. The variable amount, whether commissions, bonus, or
profit sharing, serves to stimulate and reward effort. Expense allowances enable sales reps to meet
the expenses of travel and entertaining. Benefits, such as paid vacations, sickness or accident benefits, pensions, and life insurance, provide security and job satisfaction.
Fixed compensation is common in jobs with a high ratio of nonselling to selling duties, and jobs
where the selling task is technically complex and requires teamwork. Variable compensation works
best where sales are cyclical or depend on individual initiative. Fixed and variable compensation
give rise to three basic types of compensation plans—straight salary, straight commission, and
combination salary and commission. One survey revealed that over half of sales reps receive 40 percent or more of their compensation in variable pay.96
Straight-salary plans provide a secure income, encourage reps to complete nonselling activities,
and reduce incentive to overstock customers. For the firm, these plans represent administrative
simplicity and lower turnover. Straight-commission plans attract higher performers, provide more
motivation, require less supervision, and control selling costs. On the negative side, they emphasize
getting the sale over building the relationship. Combination plans feature the benefits of both plans
while limiting their disadvantages.
Plans that combine fixed and variable pay link the variable portion to a wide variety of strategic
goals. One current trend deemphasizes sales volume in favor of gross profitability, customer satisfaction, and customer retention. Other companies reward reps partly on sales team or even company-wide performance, motivating them to work together for the common good.

Managing the Sales Force
Various policies and procedures guide the firm in recruiting, selecting, training, supervising, motivating, and evaluating sales representatives to manage its sales force (see
Figure 19.5).

|Fig. 19.5|

Managing the Sales
Force

Recruiting and Selecting Representatives
At the heart of any successful sales force is a means of selecting effective representatives. One survey
revealed that the top 25 percent of the sales force brought in over 52 percent of the sales. It’s a great

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

waste to hire the wrong people. The average annual turnover rate of sales reps for all industries is
almost 20 percent. Sales force turnover leads to lost sales, the expense of finding and training replacements, and often pressure on existing salespeople to pick up the slack.97
After management develops its selection criteria, it must recruit. The human resources department solicits names from current sales representatives, uses employment agencies, places job ads,
and contacts college students. Selection procedures can vary from a single informal interview to
prolonged testing and interviewing.
Studies have shown little relationship between sales performance on one hand, and background
and experience variables, current status, lifestyle, attitude, personality, and skills on the other. More
effective predictors have been composite tests and assessment centers that simulate the working environment so applicants are assessed in an environment similar to the one in which they would
work.98 Although scores from formal tests are only one element in a set that includes personal characteristics, references, past employment history, and interviewer reactions, they have been weighted
quite heavily by companies such as IBM, Prudential, and Procter & Gamble. Gillette claims tests
have reduced turnover and scores correlated well with the progress of new reps.

Training and Supervising Sales Representatives
Today’s customers expect salespeople to have deep product knowledge, add ideas to improve operations, and be efficient and reliable. These demands have required companies to make a much
greater investment in sales training.
New reps may spend a few weeks to several months in training. The median training period is
28 weeks in industrial-products companies, 12 in service companies, and 4 in consumer-products
companies. Training time varies with the complexity of the selling task and the type of recruit. For
all sales, new hire “ramp up” to full effectiveness is taking longer than ever, with 27 percent taking
3 to 6 months, 38 percent taking 6 to 12 months, and 28 percent needing 12 months or more.
New methods of training are continually emerging, such as the use of audio- and videotapes,
CDs and CD-ROMs, programmed learning, distance learning, and films. Some firms use role
playing and sensitivity or empathy training to help reps identify with customers’ situations and
motives.
Reps paid mostly on commission generally receive less supervision. Those who are salaried and
must cover definite accounts are likely to receive substantial supervision. With multilevel selling, such
as Avon, Sara Lee, Virgin, and others use, independent distributors are also in charge of their own sales
force selling company products. These independent contractors or reps are paid a commission not
only on their own sales but also on the sales of people they recruit and train.99

Sales Rep Productivity
How many calls should a company make on a particular account each year? Some research suggests
today’s sales reps spend too much time selling to smaller, less profitable accounts instead of focusing
on larger, more profitable accounts.100

NORMS FOR PROSPECT CALLS Left to their own devices, many reps will spend most of
their time with current customers, who are known quantities. Reps can depend on them for some
business, whereas a prospect might never deliver any. Companies therefore often specify how much
time reps should spend prospecting for new accounts. Spector Freight wants its sales
representatives to spend 25 percent of their time prospecting and stop after three unsuccessful calls.
Some companies rely on a missionary sales force to open new accounts.

USING SALES TIME EFFICIENTLY The best sales reps manage their time efficiently. Timeand-duty analysis helps reps understand how they spend their time and how they might increase
their productivity. In the course of a day, sales reps spend time planning, traveling, waiting, selling,
and doing administrative tasks (report writing and billing; attending sales meetings; and talking to
others in the company about production, delivery, billing, and sales performance). It’s no wonder
face-to-face selling accounts for as little as 29 percent of total working time!101
Companies constantly try to improve sales force productivity.102 To cut costs, reduce time demands on their outside sales force, and leverage computer and telecommunications innovations,
many have increased the size and responsibilities of their inside sales force.

| CHAPTER 19

557

558

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Inside salespeople are of three types: Technical support people provide technical information and
answers to customers’ questions. Sales assistants provide clerical backup for outside salespersons, call
ahead to confirm appointments, run credit checks, follow up on deliveries, and answer customers’
business-related questions. Telemarketers use the phone to find new leads, qualify them, and sell to
them. Telemarketers can call up to 50 customers a day, compared to 4 for an outside salesperson.
The inside sales force frees outside reps to spend more time selling to major accounts, identifying and converting new major prospects, placing electronic ordering systems in customers’ facilities, and obtaining more blanket orders and systems contracts. Inside salespeople spend more time
checking inventory, following up orders, and phoning smaller accounts. Outside sales reps are paid
largely on an incentive-compensation basis, and inside reps on a salary or salary-plus-bonus pay.

SALES TECHNOLOGY The salesperson today has truly gone electronic. Not only is sales and
inventory information transferred much faster, but specific computer-based decision support
systems have been created for sales managers and sales representatives. Using laptop computers,
salespeople can access valuable product and customer information. With a few keystrokes,
salespeople can prime themselves on backgrounds of clients; call up prewritten sales letters;
transmit orders and resolve customer-service issues on the spot; and send samples, pamphlets,
brochures, and other materials to clients.
One of the most valuable electronic tools for the sales rep is the company Web site, and one of
its most useful applications is as a prospecting tool. Company Web sites can help define the firm’s
relationships with individual accounts and identify those whose business warrants a personal sales
call. They provide an introduction to self-identified potential customers and might even receive the
initial order. For more complex transactions, the site provides a way for the buyer to contact the
seller. Selling over the Internet supports relationship marketing by solving problems that do not require live intervention and thus allows more time for issues best addressed face-to-face.

Motivating Sales Representatives
The majority of sales representatives require encouragement and special incentives, especially those
in the field who encounter daily challenges.103 Most marketers believe that the higher the salesperson’s motivation, the greater the effort and the resulting performance, rewards, and satisfaction—
all of which in turn further increase motivation.

INTRINSIC VERSUS EXTRINSIC REWARDS Marketers reinforce intrinsic and extrinsic
rewards of all types. One research study found the reward with the highest value was pay, followed
by promotion, personal growth, and sense of accomplishment.104 Least valued were liking and
respect, security, and recognition. In other words, salespeople are highly motivated by pay and the
chance to get ahead and satisfy their intrinsic needs, and may be less motivated by compliments
and security. Some firms use sales contests to increase sales effort.105

SALES QUOTAS Many companies set annual sales quotas, developed from the annual
marketing plan, on dollar sales, unit volume, margin, selling effort or activity, or product type.
Compensation is often tied to degree of quota fulfillment. The company first prepares a sales
forecast that becomes the basis for planning production, workforce size, and financial
requirements. Management then establishes quotas for regions and territories, which typically add
up to more than the sales forecast to encourage managers and salespeople to perform at their best.
Even if they fail to make their quotas, the company nevertheless may reach its sales forecast.
Each area sales manager divides the area’s quota among its reps. Sometimes a rep’s quotas are set
high, to spur extra effort, or more modestly, to build confidence. One general view is that a salesperson’s quota should be at least equal to last year’s sales, plus some fraction of the difference
between territory sales potential and last year’s sales. The more favorably the salesperson reacts to
pressure, the higher the fraction should be.
Conventional wisdom is that profits are maximized by sales reps focusing on the more
important products and more profitable products. Reps are unlikely to achieve their quotas for
established products when the company is launching several new products at the same time. The
company will need to expand its sales force for new-product launches.
Setting sales quotas can create problems. If the company underestimates and the sales reps easily
achieve their quotas, it has overpaid them. If it overestimates sales potential, the salespeople will find it
very hard to reach their quotas and be frustrated or quit. Another downside is that quotas can drive

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

Oracle

reps to get as much business as possible—often ignoring the service side of the business. The company
gains short-term results at the cost of long-term customer satisfaction. For these reasons, some companies are dropping quotas. Even hard-driving Oracle has changed its approach to sales compensation.

Oracle Finding sales flagging and customers griping, Oracle, the second-largest soft-

ware company in the world, decided to overhaul its sales department and practices. Its rapidly
expanding capabilities, with diverse applications such as human resources, supply chain, and
CRM, meant one rep could no longer be responsible for selling all Oracle products to certain customers. Reorganization let reps specialize in a few particular products. To tone down the sales
force’s reputation as overly aggressive, Oracle changed the commission structure from a range of 2 percent
to 12 percent to a flat 4 percent to 6 percent and adopted guidelines on how to “play nice” with channels, independent software vendors (ISVs), resellers, integrators, and value-added resellers (VARs). The six principles
instructed sales staff to identify and work with partners in accounts and respect their positions and the value
they add, in order to address partner feedback that Oracle should be more predictable and reliable.106

Evaluating Sales Representatives
We have been describing the feed-forward aspects of sales supervision—how management communicates what the sales reps should be doing and motivates them to do it. But good feed-forward requires good feedback, which means getting regular information from reps to evaluate performance.

SOURCES OF INFORMATION The most important source of information about reps is
sales reports. Additional information comes through personal observation, salesperson selfreports, customer letters and complaints, customer surveys, and conversations with other reps.
Sales reports are divided between activity plans and write-ups of activity results. The best example of the former is the salesperson’s work plan, which reps submit a week or month in advance to
describe intended calls and routing. This report forces sales reps to plan and schedule their activities and inform management of their whereabouts. It provides a basis for comparing their plans
and accomplishments or their ability to “plan their work and work their plan.”
Many companies require representatives to develop an annual territory-marketing plan in
which they outline their program for developing new accounts and increasing business from existing accounts. Sales managers study these plans, make suggestions, and use them to develop sales
quotas. Sales reps write up completed activities on call reports. Sales representatives also submit expense reports, new-business reports, lost-business reports, and reports on local business and economic conditions.
These reports provide raw data from which sales managers can extract key indicators of sales
performance: (1) average number of sales calls per salesperson per day, (2) average sales call time
per contact, (3) average revenue per sales call, (4) average cost per sales call, (5) entertainment cost
per sales call, (6) percentage of orders per hundred sales calls, (7) number of new customers per period, (8) number of lost customers per period, and (9) sales force cost as a percentage of total sales.
FORMAL EVALUATION The sales force’s reports along with other observations supply the
raw materials for evaluation. One type of evaluation compares current to past performance. An
example is shown in
Table 19.1.
The sales manager can learn many things about a rep from this table. Total sales increased every
year (line 3). This does not necessarily mean he is doing a better job. The product breakdown shows
he has been able to push the sales of product B further than the sales of product A (lines 1 and 2).
According to his quotas for the two products (lines 4 and 5), his increasing product B sales could be
at the expense of product A sales. According to gross profits (lines 6 and 7), the company earns
more selling A than B. The rep might be pushing the higher-volume, lower-margin product at the
expense of the more profitable product. Although the rep increased total sales by $1,100 between
2009 and 2010 (line 3), gross profits on total sales actually decreased by $580 (line 8).
Sales expense (line 9) shows a steady increase, although total expense as a percentage of total sales
seems to be under control (line 10). The upward trend in total dollar expense does not seem to be
explained by any increase in the number of calls (line 11), although it might be related to success in

| CHAPTER 19

559

560

PART 7

TABLE 19.1

COMMUNICATING VALUE

Form for Evaluating Sales Representative’s Performance

Territory: Midland Sales Representative: John Smith
1. Net sales product A
2. Net sales product B
3. Net sales total
4. Percent of quota product A
5. Percent of quota product B
6. Gross profits product A
7. Gross profits product B
8. Gross profits total
9. Sales expense
10. Sales expense to total sales (%)
11. Number of calls
12. Cost per call
13. Average number of customers
14. Number of new customers
15. Number of lost customers
16. Average sales per customer
17. Average gross profit per customer

2007

2008

2009

2010

$251,300
423,200
674,500
95.6
120.4
$50,260
42,320
92,580
$10,200
1.5
1,675
$6.09
320
13
8
$2,108
$289

$253,200
439,200
692,400
92.0
122.3
$50,640
43,920
94,560
$11,100
1.6
1,700
$6.53
24
14
10
$2,137
$292

$270,000
553,900
823,900
88.0
134.9
$54,000
55,390
109,390
$11,600
1.4
1,680
$6.90
328
15
11
$2,512
$334

$263,100
561,900
825,000
84.7
130.8
$52,620
56,190
108,810
$13,200
1.6
1,660
$7.95
334
20
14
$2,470
$326

acquiring new customers (line 14). Perhaps in prospecting for new customers, this rep is neglecting
present customers, as indicated by an upward trend in the annual number of lost accounts (line 15).
The last two lines show the level and trend in sales and gross profits per customer. These figures
become more meaningful when compared with overall company averages. If this rep’s average gross
profit per customer is lower than the company’s average, he could be concentrating on the wrong
customers or not spending enough time with each customer. A review of annual number of calls
(line 11) shows he might be making fewer annual calls than the average salesperson. If distances in
the territory are similar to those in other territories, the rep might not be putting in a full workday,
is poor at sales planning and routing, or is spending too much time with certain accounts.
Even if effective in producing sales, the rep may not rate high with customers. Success may come because competitors’ salespeople are inferior, the rep’s product is better, or new customers are always
found to replace those who dislike the rep. Managers can glean customer opinions of the salesperson,
product, and service by mail questionnaires or telephone calls. Sales reps can analyze the success or failure of a sales call and how they would improve the odds on subsequent calls. Their performance could
be related to internal factors (effort, ability, and strategy) and/or external factors (task and luck).107

Principles of Personal Selling
Personal selling is an ancient art. Effective salespeople today have more than instinct, however.
Companies now spend hundreds of millions of dollars each year to train them in methods of analysis and customer management and to transform them from passive order takers into active order
getters. Reps are taught the SPIN method to build long-term relationships, with questions such as:108
1.
2.
3.
4.

Situation questions—These ask about facts or explore the buyer’s present situation. For example,
“What system are you using to invoice your customers?”
Problem questions—These deal with problems, difficulties, and dissatisfactions the buyer is
experiencing. For example, “What parts of the system create errors?”
Implication questions—These ask about the consequences or effects of a buyer’s problems, difficulties, or dissatisfactions. For example,“How does this problem affect your people’s productivity?”
Need-payoff questions—These ask about the value or usefulness of a proposed solution. For
example, “How much would you save if our company could help reduce errors by 80 percent?”

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

Most sales training programs agree on the major steps in any effective sales process. We show
these steps in
Figure 19.6 and discuss their application to industrial selling next.109

| CHAPTER 19
Prospecting
and qualifying

The Six Steps
PROSPECTING AND QUALIFYING The first step in selling is to identify and qualify
prospects. More companies are taking responsibility for finding and qualifying leads so salespeople
can use their expensive time doing what they can do best: selling. Companies qualify the leads by
contacting them by mail or phone to assess their level of interest and financial capacity. “Hot”
prospects are turned over to the field sales force and “warm” prospects to the telemarketing unit for
follow-up. Even then, it takes about four calls on a prospect to consummate a business transaction.

Preapproach

Presentation
and
demonstration

PREAPPROACH The salesperson needs to learn as much as possible about the prospect
company (what it needs, who takes part in the purchase decision) and its buyers (personal
characteristics and buying styles). How is the purchasing process conducted at the company? How
is purchasing structured? Many purchasing departments in larger companies have been elevated
into strategic supply departments with more professional practices. Centralized purchasing may
put a premium on having larger suppliers able to meet all the company’s needs. At the same time,
some companies are also decentralizing purchasing for smaller items such as coffeemakers, office
supplies, and other inexpensive necessities.
The sales rep must thoroughly understand the purchasing process in terms of “who, when, where,
how, and why” in order to set call objectives: to qualify the prospect, gather information, or make an
immediate sale. Another task is to choose the best contact approach—a personal visit, a phone call,
or a letter. The right approach is crucial given that it has become harder and harder for sales reps to
get into the offices of purchasing agents, physicians, and other possible time-starved and Internetenabled customers. Finally, the salesperson should plan an overall sales strategy for the account.

PRESENTATION AND DEMONSTRATION The salesperson tells the product “story” to
the buyer, using a features, advantages, benefits, and value (FABV) approach. Features describe
physical characteristics of a market offering, such as chip processing speeds or memory capacity.
Advantages describe why the features provide an advantage to the customer. Benefits describe the
economic, technical, service, and social pluses delivered by the offering. Value describes the
offering’s worth (often in monetary terms). Salespeople often spend too much time on product
features (a product orientation) and not enough time stressing benefits and value (a customer
orientation). The pitch to a prospective client must be highly relevant, engaging, and compelling—
there is always another company waiting to take that business.110

OVERCOMING OBJECTIONS Customers typically pose objections. Psychological resistance
includes resistance to interference, preference for established supply sources or brands, apathy,
reluctance to give up something, unpleasant associations created by the sales rep, predetermined
ideas, dislike of making decisions, and neurotic attitude toward money. Logical resistance might be
objections to the price, delivery schedule, or product or company characteristics.
To handle these objections, the salesperson maintains a positive approach, asks the buyer to
clarify the objection, questions in such a way that the buyer answers his own objection, denies the
validity of the objection, or turns it into a reason for buying. Although price is the most frequently
negotiated issue—especially in an economic recession—others include contract completion time;
quality of goods and services offered; purchase volume; responsibility for financing, risk taking,
promotion, and title; and product safety.
Salespeople sometimes give in too easily when customers demand a discount. One company
recognized this problem when sales revenues went up 25 percent but profit remained flat. The company decided to retrain its salespeople to “sell the price,” rather than “sell through price.”
Salespeople were given richer information about each customer’s sales history and behavior. They
received training to recognize value-adding opportunities rather than price-cutting opportunities.
As a result, the company’s sales revenues climbed and so did its margins.111

CLOSING Closing signs from the buyer include physical actions, statements or comments, and
questions. Reps can ask for the order, recapitulate the points of agreement, offer to help write up
the order, ask whether the buyer wants A or B, get the buyer to make minor choices such as color or
size, or indicate what the buyer will lose by not placing the order now. The salesperson might offer
specific inducements to close, such as an additional service, an extra quantity, or a token gift.

Overcoming
objections

Closing

Follow-up
and
maintenance

|Fig. 19.6|

Major Steps in
Effective Selling

561

562

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

If the client still isn’t budging, perhaps the salesperson is not interacting with the right executive—a
more senior person may have the necessary authority. The salesperson also may need to find other ways
to reinforce the value of the offering and how it alleviates financial or other pressures the client faces.112

FOLLOW-UP AND MAINTENANCE Follow-up and maintenance are necessary to ensure
customer satisfaction and repeat business. Immediately after closing, the salesperson should cement any
necessary details about delivery time, purchase terms, and other matters important to the customer. The
salesperson should schedule a follow-up call after delivery to ensure proper installation, instruction, and
servicing and to detect any problems, assure the buyer of the salesperson’s interest, and reduce any
cognitive dissonance. The salesperson should develop a maintenance and growth plan for the account.

Relationship Marketing
The principles of personal selling and negotiation are largely transaction-oriented because their
purpose is to close a specific sale. But in many cases the company seeks not an immediate sale but
rather a long-term supplier–customer relationship. Today’s customers prefer suppliers who can sell and
deliver a coordinated set of products and services to many locations, who can quickly solve problems in
different locations, and who can work closely with customer teams to improve products and processes.
Salespeople working with key customers must do more than call only when they think customers
might be ready to place orders. They should call or visit at other times and make useful suggestions
about the business. They should monitor key accounts, know customers’ problems, and be ready to
serve them in a number of ways, adapting and responding to different customer needs or situations.113
Relationship marketing is not effective in all situations. But when it is the right strategy and is
properly implemented, the organization will focus as much on managing its customers as on managing its products.

Summary
1. Direct marketing is an interactive marketing system that
uses one or more media to effect a measurable response
or transaction at any location. Direct marketing, especially electronic marketing, is showing explosive growth.
2. Direct marketers plan campaigns by deciding on objectives, target markets and prospects, offers, and prices.
Next, they test and establish measures to determine the
campaign’s success.
3. Major channels for direct marketing include face-to-face
selling, direct mail, catalog marketing, telemarketing, interactive TV, kiosks, Web sites, and mobile devices.
4. Interactive marketing provides marketers with opportunities for much greater interaction and individualization
through well-designed and executed Web sites, search
ads, display ads, and e-mails. Mobile marketing is
another growing form of interactive marketing that relies
on text messages, software apps, and ads.
5. Word-of-mouth marketing finds ways to engage customers so they choose to talk with others about products, services, and brands. Increasingly, word of mouth
is being driven by social media in the form of online
communities and forums, blogs, and social networks
such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
6. Two notable forms of word-of-mouth marketing are
buzz marketing, which seeks to get people talking
about a brand by ensuring that a product or service or

how it is marketed is out of the ordinary, and viral marketing, which encourages people to exchange online information related to a product or service.
7. Salespeople serve as a company’s link to its customers.
The sales rep is the company to many of its customers,
and it is the rep who brings back to the company
much-needed information about the customer.
8. Designing the sales force requires choosing objectives,
strategy, structure, size, and compensation. Objectives
may include prospecting, targeting, communicating, selling, servicing, information gathering, and allocating.
Determining strategy requires choosing the most effective
mix of selling approaches. Choosing the sales force structure entails dividing territories by geography, product, or
market (or some combination of these). To estimate how
large the sales force needs to be, the firm estimates the
total workload and how many sales hours (and hence
salespeople) will be needed. Compensating the sales
force entails determining what types of salaries, commissions, bonuses, expense accounts, and benefits to give,
and how much weight customer satisfaction should have
in determining total compensation.
9. There are five steps in managing the sales force: (1) recruiting and selecting sales representatives; (2) training
the representatives in sales techniques and in the company’s products, policies, and customer-satisfaction
orientation; (3) supervising the sales force and helping

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

reps to use their time efficiently; (4) motivating the sales
force and balancing quotas, monetary rewards, and
supplementary motivators; (5) evaluating individual and
group sales performance.
10. Effective salespeople are trained in the methods of analysis and customer management, as well as the art of sales

| CHAPTER 19

563

professionalism. No single approach works best in all circumstances, but most trainers agree that selling is a sixstep process: prospecting and qualifying customers,
preapproach, presentation and demonstration, overcoming objections, closing, and follow-up and maintenance.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Are Great Salespeople Born or Made?

Marketing Discussion
Corporate Web Sites

One debate in sales is about the impact of training versus selection in developing an effective sales force. Some observers
maintain the best salespeople are born that way and are effective due to their personalities and interpersonal skills developed
over a lifetime. Others contend that application of leading-edge
sales techniques can make virtually anyone a sales star.
Take a position: The key to developing an effective
sales force is selection versus The key to developing an
effective sales force is training.

Pick a company and go to its corporate Web site. How would
you evaluate the Web site? How well does it score on the
7Cs of design elements: context, content, community, customization, communication, connection, and commerce?

Marketing Excellence

>>Facebook

Facebook has brought a whole
new level of personal marketing to the world of business.
The social networking Web site fulfills people’s desire to
communicate and interact with each other and uses that
power to help other companies target very specific audiences with personalized messages.
Facebook was founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg,
who was a student at Harvard University at the time and
created the first version of the Web site in his dorm room.
Zuckerberg recalled, “I just thought that being able to have
access to different people’s profiles would be interesting.
Obviously, there’s no way you can get access to that stuff

unless people are throwing up profiles, so I wanted to
make an application that would allow people to do that, to
share as much information as they wanted while having
control over what they put up.” From the beginning,
Facebook has kept its profiles and navigation tools relatively simple in order to unify the look and feel for each individual. Within the first 24 hours the Facebook Web site
was up, between 1,200 and 1,500 Harvard students had
registered and become part of the Facebook community.
Within the first month, half the campus had registered.
Initially, Facebook’s Web site could only be viewed
and used by Harvard students. The early momentum was
tremendous, though, and Facebook soon expanded to include students throughout the Ivy League and other colleges. The initial decision to keep Facebook exclusive to
college students was critical to its early success. It gave
the social Web site a sense of privacy, unity, and exclusivity that social media competitors like MySpace did not offer. Eventually, in 2006, Facebook opened up to everyone.
Today, Facebook is the most popular social networking Web site in the world, with over 500 million active
users. The site allows users to create personal profiles
with information such as their hometowns, work, educational background, favorite things, and religious affiliation.
It encourages them to extend their network by adding
other users as friends, and many people try to see how
many “friends” they can accumulate. To interact with
Facebook friends, users can send messages; “poke”
each other; upload and view albums, photos, games, and

564

PART 7

COMMUNICATING VALUE

videos; and “tag” or label people in their photos. They can
post comments on friends’ “walls” and create status updates viewable to everyone. In summary, Facebook is fulfilling its mission to “give people the power to share and
make the world more open and connected.”
Facebook has become a critical marketing component for just about any brand for several reasons. First,
companies, sports teams, musicians, and politicians can
create Facebook pages—a place to communicate to
and with their fans. Facebook pages offer groups and
brands a way to personally interact, build awareness,
communicate, and offer information to anyone who
takes an interest. Companies use Facebook to introduce
new products, launch videos and promotions, upload
images, communicate to consumers, listen to feedback,
and create an overall personal look and feel. Even politicians from around the world—from the United States to
the Philippines—use Facebook to push their campaigns
and communicate with supporters on a local, personalized basis.
Facebook also offers targeted advertising opportunities. Banner ads—the company’s major source of
income—can target individuals by demographic or
keywords based on the specific information they have
placed in their profiles. adidas, for example, uses
Facebook to promote specific labels within the company,
target consumers regionally, and give the brand a
personal touch. The head of adidas’s digital marketing
group explained, “Wherever our fans are, we’re going to
use Facebook to speak to them and we’re going to try to
speak to them in a locally relevant way.”

Facebook’s growth and influence have been incredible.
In one survey, college students named Facebook the second most popular thing in their undergraduate world, tied
only with beer. And Facebook is not used only by undergrads. Of the 150+ million users in the United States, 29
percent are aged 35 to 54, while 25 percent are aged 18 to
24. Overall, women represent the fast-growing segment.
Facebook also tends to have a more upscale, educated,
desirable demographic than competitive social networks,
and therefore it charges more for its advertising ads.
In 2010, Facebook surpassed Google as the top Web
site in the world based on unique visitors per month and
also ranked number one for number of pages viewed per
month. Facebook has become an important part of consumers’ everyday lives and therefore a critical component
in personal marketing strategies.

Marketing Excellence

>>Unilever (Axe and Dove)

Questions
1. Why is Facebook unique in the world of personal
marketing?
2. Is Facebook just a passing fad or is it here to stay?
What are the company’s greatest strengths and risks?
3. Discuss the recent privacy issues that challenged
Facebook. Will privacy restrictions limit its ability to
offer personal marketing opportunities?
Sources: John Cassidy, “Me Media,” New Yorker, May 15, 2006; “Survey: College Kids Like
iPods Better Than Beer,” Associated Press, June 8, 2006; Peter Corbett, “Facebook
Demographics and Statistics Report 2010,” I Strategy Labs, www.istrategylabs.com; Brian
Womack, “Facebook Sees Fourfold Jump in Number of Advertisers Since 2009,” BusinessWeek,
June 2, 2010; Kermit Pattison, “How to Market Your Business with Facebook,” New York Times,
November 11, 2009; Facebook, www.facebook.com.

Unilever—the manufacturer of several home care, food,
and personal care brands—understands the importance
of using personal marketing communications to target
specific age groups, demographics, and lifestyles. As a
result, it has developed some of the most successful
brands in the world, including Axe, a male grooming
brand, and Dove, a personal care brand aimed at women.
Axe is the most popular male grooming brand in the
world and Unilever’s best seller. The brand, which offers a
wide range of personal care products from body spray to
body gel, deodorant, and shampoo, was launched in 1983
and introduced in the United States in 2002. Axe targets
15- to 25-year-old males who are interested in improving
their appeal to the opposite sex and “keeping a step
ahead in the mating game.” Most Axe ads use humor and
sex and often feature skinny, average guys attracting
beautiful girls by the dozen. The result: the brand is

MANAGING PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

aspirational and approachable, and the lighthearted tone
hits home with young men. In one recent global campaign
called “Bom-chika-wah-wah” (after the pop culture phrase
that mimics a guitar sound from 1970s adult movies),
gorgeous women are instantly attracted to average guys
through a single whiff of Axe deodorant or body spray.
Axe has won numerous advertising awards not only
for its creative but also for its effective use of unconventional media channels. From edgy online videos to video
games, blogs, chat rooms, and mobile apps, the Axe
brand engages young adult males on their own turf. In
Colombia, for example, a female Axe Patrol scopes out
the bar and club scene and sprays men with Axe body
sprays. Unilever Marketing Director Kevin George explained, “This is all about going beyond the 30-second TV
commercial to create a deeper bond with our guy.”
Axe knows where to reach its consumers. It advertises only on male-dominated networks such as MTV,
ESPN, Spike, and Comedy Central. It partners with the
NBA and NCAA, which draw in younger male audiences
than many other sports. Print ads appear in Playboy,
Rolling Stone, GQ, and Maxim. Axe’s online efforts via
Facebook, Twitter, chat rooms, and banner ads help drive
consumers back to its Web site (www.theaxeeffect.com)
where Axe continues to build brand loyalty. For example,
one ad costing $200,000 featured men in a small town in
Alaska who use Axe to attract women. It was viewed
more than 10 million times online.
Axe also understands that it has to work hard to keep
the brand fresh, relevant, and cool with its fickle young
audience. So it launches a new fragrance every year and
refreshes its online and advertising communications constantly. Axe’s success in personal marketing has lifted the
brand to become the leader in what many had thought
was the mature $2.4 billion deodorant category.
On the other side of the personal marketing spectrum, Unilever’s Dove brand speaks to women with a different tone and message. In 2003, Dove shifted away
from it traditional advertising touting the brand’s benefit of
one-quarter moisturizing cream and the results experienced after the seven-day Dove test. Its “Real Beauty”
campaign instead celebrates “real women” of all shapes,
sizes, ages, and colors. The campaign arose from research revealing that only 2 percent of women worldwide
considered themselves beautiful, and an overwhelming
majority strongly agree that “the media and advertising set
an unrealistic standard of beauty.” Dove set out to speak
personally to women about the idea that “beauty comes
in all shapes and sizes.”
The first phase of the “Real Beauty” campaign featured
nontraditional female models and asked consumers to
judge their looks online (Wrinkled? Wonderful? Oversized?
Outstanding?) at www.campaignforrealbeauty.com. The

| CHAPTER 19

565

personal questions shocked many but created such a
grand PR buzz that Dove continued the campaign. The
second phase featured candid and confident images of
curvy, full-bodied women—again, smashing stereotypes
and touching home with the majority of women all over the
world while promoting Dove skin products such as Intensive
Firming Cream, Lotion, and Body Wash. The multimedia
campaign was thoroughly integrated, combining traditional
TV and print ads with new forms of media, such as real-time
voting for models on cell phones and tabulated displays of
results on giant billboards. In addition, Dove’s Web site
became a crucial component for initiating dialogue between
women. The third phase of the campaign, called “Pro-Age,”
featured older, nude women and asked questions like,
“Does beauty have an age limit?” Almost instantly, the company heard positive feedback from its older consumers.
In addition, Dove released two Dove Films, one of
which, Evolution, won both a Cyber and film Grand Prix at
the International Advertising Festival. The film shows a
rapid-motion view of an ordinary-looking woman transformed by makeup artists, hairdressers, lighting, and digital
retouching to end up looking like a billboard supermodel.
The end tagline is: “No wonder our perception of beauty is
distorted.” The film became an instant viral hit and has
been viewed more than 15 million times online and by more
than 300 million people worldwide, including in news coverage and other channels of distribution. In total, Dove’s
“Campaign for Real Beauty” has touched women all over
the world and been mentioned in over 800 articles in leading
newspapers from Le Parisien to The Times in London.
Although both campaigns have sparked much controversy and debate for different reasons, they have been
credited with boosting Unilever’s sales and market share
all over the globe.
Questions
1. What makes personal marketing work? Why are
Dove and Axe so successful at it?
2. Can personal marketing go too far in a company?
Why or why not?
3. Is there a conflict of interests in the way Unilever markets
to women and young men? Is it undoing all the good
that might be done in the “Campaign for Real Beauty”
by making women sex symbols in Axe ads? Discuss.
Sources: Jack Neff, “Dove’s ‘Real Beauty’ Pics Could Be Big Phonies,” Advertising Age, May 7,
2008; Catherine Holahan, “Raising the Bar on Viral Web Ads,” BusinessWeek, July 23, 2006;
Robert Berner, “How Unilever Scored with Young Guys,” BusinessWeek, May 23, 2005; Thomas
Mucha, “Spray Here. Get Girl,” Business 2.0, June 2003; Randall Rothenberg, “Dove Effort Gives
Packaged-Goods Marketers Lessons for the Future,” Advertising Age, March 5, 2007; Theresa
Howard, “Ad Campaign Tells Women to Celebrate Who They Are,” USA Today, July 8, 2005; Jack
Neff, “In Dove Ads, Normal Is the New Beautiful,” Advertising Age, September 27, 2004; Laura
Petrecca, “Amusing or Offensive, Axe Ads Show That Sexism Sells,” USA Today, April 18, 2007;
Dove, www.campaignforrealbeauty.com; Unilever, www.unilever.com.

PART 8 Creating Successful Long-term Growth
Chapter 20 | Introducing New Market Offerings
Chapter 21 | Tapping into Global Markets
Chapter 22 | Managing a Holistic Marketing Organization for the Long Run

r
e
t
ap
h
C

20

In This Chapter, We Will Address
the Following Questions
1. What challenges does a company face in developing new products and
services?
2. What organizational structures and processes do managers use to
oversee new-product development?
3. What are the main stages in developing new products and services?
4. What is the best way to manage the new-product development
process?
5. What factors affect the rate of diffusion and consumer adoption of
newly launched products and services?

With a unique approach to video game
playing, Nintendo’s highly interactive and
engaging Wii became a huge hit.

Introducing New
Market Offerings
New-product development shapes the company’s future. Improved or
replacement products and services can maintain or build sales; new-to-the-world products and
services can transform industries and companies and change lives. But the low success rate of new
products and services points to the many challenges they face. Companies are doing more than just
talking about innovation. They are challenging industry norms and past conventions to develop new
products and services that delight and engage consumers. Nintendo’s Wii is a prime example.1

Although Nintendo helped create the $30 billion global video game business, its U.S.
sales had shrunk in half by 2006. CEO Satoru Iwata and game designer Shigeru
Miyamoto decided to address two troubling trends in the industry: As players got
older and acquired families and careers, they played less often, and as video game
consoles got more powerful, they grew more expensive. Nintendo’s solution?
Redesign the game controllers and the way they interacted with the consoles. Bucking industry
trends, Nintendo chose a cheaper, lower-power chip with fewer
graphics capabilities, creating a totally different style of play based
Marketers play a key role in new-product development
on physical gestures. A sleek white design and a new motion-sensitive
by identifying and evaluating ideas and working with R&D and
wireless controller made it much more engaging and interactive. other areas in every stage of development. This chapter
Nintendo’s decision to embrace outside software developers meant a provides a detailed analysis of the new-product development
number of titles quickly became available. Thus Wii was born. Its process. Much of the discussion is equally relevant to new
collaborative nature made it a hit with nongamers drawn by its capa- products, services, or business models. Chapter 21 considers
bilities and hard-core players seeking to master its many intriguing how marketers can tap into global markets as another source of
long-term growth.
games.

New-Product Options
There are a variety of types of new products and ways to create them.2

Make or Buy
A company can add new products through acquisition or development. When acquiring, the company can buy other companies, patents from other companies, or a license or franchise from
another company. Swiss food giant Nestlé has increased its presence in North America by acquiring
such diverse brands as Carnation, Hills Brothers, Stouffer’s, Ralston Purina, Dreyer’s Ice Cream,
Chef America, Jenny Craig, and Gerber.
But firms can successfully make only so many acquisitions. At some point, they need organic
growth— the development of new products from within. Praxair, worldwide provider of industrial
gases, achieved an ambitious goal of $200 million per year of double-digit new annual sales growth
only through a healthy dose of organic growth and a large number of smaller but significant
$5 million projects.3
567

568

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

For product development, the company can create new products in its own laboratories, or it
can contract with independent researchers or new-product development firms to develop specific new products or provide new technology.4 Firms such as Samsung, GE, Diageo, Hershey,
and USB have engaged new-product consulting boutiques to provide fresh insights and points
of view.

Types of New Products
New products range from new-to-the-world products that create an entirely new market to minor
improvements or revisions of existing products. Most new-product activity is devoted to improving existing products. Some of the most successful recent new consumer products have been brand
extensions: Tide Total Care, Gillette Venus Embrace, Bounce Extra Soft, Always Infinity, and Secret
Flawless deodorant.5 At Sony, modifications of established products account for over 80 percent of
new-product activity.
It is increasingly difficult to identify blockbuster products that will transform a market, but continuous innovation can force competitors to play catch-up and also broaden the brand meaning.6
Once a running-shoe manufacturer, Nike now competes with makers of all types of athletic shoes,
clothing, and equipment. Armstrong World Industries moved from selling floor coverings to ceilings to total interior surface decoration.
Fewer than 10 percent of all new products are truly innovative and new to the world.7 These
products incur the greatest cost and risk. Although radical innovations can hurt the company’s
bottom line in the short run, if they succeed they can create a greater sustainable competitive
advantage than ordinary products and produce significant financial rewards as a result.8
Companies typically must create a strong R&D and marketing partnership to pull off a radical
innovation.9 The right corporate culture is another crucial determinant; the firm must prepare to
cannibalize existing products, tolerate risk, and maintain a future market orientation.10 Few reliable techniques exist for estimating demand for radical innovations.11 Focus groups can provide
perspective on customer interest and need, but marketers may need a probe-and-learn approach
based on observation and feedback of early users’ experiences and other means such as online chats
or product-focused blogs.
High-tech firms in telecommunications, computers, consumer electronics, biotech, and software in particular seek radical innovation.12 They face a number of product-launch challenges:
high technological uncertainty, high market uncertainty, fierce competition, high investment costs,
short product life cycles, and scarce funding sources for risky projects.13 Successes abound,
however.14 BMW is spending more than $1 billion to develop a small car for urban drivers, including an electric-powered version. Blackboard e-learning software brings new technology into the
classroom to help professors manage their classes and course materials. Even consumer packaged
goods makers can benefit from a healthy dose of technology. Danone uses sophisticated R&D techniques to study bacteria, coming up with billion-dollar sellers such as Activia yogurt, sold as an aid
for regularity.

Challenges in New-Product
Development
New-product introductions have accelerated, and in retailing, consumer goods, electronics, autos,
and other industries, the time to bring a product to market has been cut in half.15 Luxury leathergoods maker Louis Vuitton implemented a new factory format dubbed Pégase so it could ship fresh
collections to its boutiques every six weeks—more than twice as frequently as in the past—giving
customers more new looks to choose from.16

The Innovation Imperative
In an economy of rapid change, continuous innovation is a necessity. Highly innovative firms are
able to identify and quickly seize new market opportunities. They create a positive attitude toward
innovation and risk taking, routinize the innovation process, practice teamwork, and allow their
people to experiment and even fail. One such firm is W. L. Gore.

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

| CHAPTER 20

569

W. L. Gore Best known for its GORE-TEX high-performance
fabrics, W. L. Gore has introduced breakthrough products as diverse as
guitar strings, dental floss, medical devices, and fuel cells—while constantly reinventing the uses of the polymer polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).
Several principles guide its new-product development. First, it works with
potential customers. Its thoracic graft, designed to combat heart disease, was developed in close collaboration with physicians. Second, it lets employees choose projects
and appoints few product leaders and teams. Gore likes to nurture “passionate
champions” who convince others a project is worth their time and commitment. Thus
leaders have positions of authority because they have followers. The development of
the fuel cell rallied more than 100 of Gore’s 9,000 research associates. Third, Gore
gives employees “dabble” time. All research associates spend 10 percent of their work
hours developing their own ideas. Promising ideas are pushed forward and judged
according to a “Real, Win, Worth” exercise: Is the opportunity real? Can we win? Can
we make money? Fourth, Gore knows when to let go, though dead ends in one area
can spark innovation in another: Elixir acoustic guitar strings were the result of a failed
venture into bike cables. Even successful ventures may need to move on. Glide shredresistant dental floss was sold to Procter & Gamble because GORE-TEX knew retailers
want to deal with a company selling a whole family of health care products.17
Companies that fail to develop new products leave their existing offerings
vulnerable to changing customer needs and tastes, new technologies, shortened product life cycles, increased domestic and foreign competition, and
especially new technologies. Kodak, long-time leader in the vanishing traditional film market, has worked hard to develop a new business model and
product-development processes for a digital-photography world. Its new goal
is to do for photos what Apple does for music by helping people organize and
manage their personal libraries of images.
Innovation is about “creating new choices” the competition doesn’t have
access to, says IDEO’s CEO Tim Brown. It isn’t about brilliant people spontaneously generating new ideas, he argues, but about finding hidden
assumptions and ignored processes that can change the way a company does
business.18

New-Product Success
Most established companies focus on incremental innovation, entering new markets by tweaking
products for new customers, using variations on a core product to stay one step ahead of the market, and creating interim solutions for industry-wide problems.
When Scott Paper couldn’t compete with Fort Howard Paper Co. on price for the lucrative institutional toilet tissue market, it borrowed a solution from European companies: a dispenser that
held bigger rolls. Scott made the larger rolls of paper and provided institutional customers with free
dispensers, later doing the same thing with paper towels. Scott not only won over customers in a
new market; it became less vulnerable to competitors, such as Fort Howard, which could lower
prices but weren’t offering the larger rolls or tailor-made dispensers.
Newer companies create disruptive technologies that are cheaper and more likely to alter the
competitive space. Established companies can be slow to react or invest in these disruptive
technologies because they threaten their investment. Then they suddenly find themselves facing
formidable new competitors, and many fail.19 To avoid this trap, incumbent firms must carefully
monitor the preferences of both customers and noncustomers and uncover evolving, difficult-toarticulate customer needs.20
What else can a company do? In a study of industrial products, new-product specialists Cooper
and Kleinschmidt found that the number one success factor is a unique, superior product. Such products succeed 98 percent of the time, compared to products with a moderate advantage (58 percent

W. L. Gore’s thoughtful newproduct development strategy has
led to many successful innovations
over the years, starting with
its waterproof, breathable
GORE-TEX fabric.

570

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

success) or minimal advantage (18 percent success). Another key factor is a well-defined product
concept. The company carefully defines and assesses the target market, product requirements, and
benefits before proceeding. Other success factors are technological and marketing synergy, quality
of execution in all stages, and market attractiveness.21
Cooper and Kleinschmidt also found that products designed solely for domestic markets tend to
show a high failure rate, low market share, and low growth. Those designed for the world market—or
at least neighboring countries—achieve significantly more profits at home and abroad. Yet only
17 percent of the products in their study were designed with an international orientation.22 The
implication is that companies should consider adopting an international perspective in designing
and developing new products, even if only to sell in their home market.

New-Product Failure
New products continue to fail at estimated rates as high as 50 percent or even 95 percent in the
United States and 90 percent in Europe.23 They fail for many reasons: ignored or misinterpreted market research; overestimates of market size; high development costs; poor design or
ineffectual performance; incorrect positioning, advertising, or price; insufficient distribution
support; competitors who fight back hard; and inadequate ROI or payback. Some additional
drawbacks are:24
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Shortage of important ideas in certain areas. There may be few ways left to improve some
basic products (such as steel or detergent).
Fragmented markets. Companies must aim their new products at smaller market segments,
which can mean lower sales and profits for each product.
Social, economic, and governmental constraints. New products must satisfy consumer safety
and environmental concerns. They must also be resilient if economic times are tough.
Cost of development. A company typically must generate many ideas to find just one worthy
of development and thus often faces high R&D, manufacturing, and marketing costs.
Capital shortages. Some companies with good ideas cannot raise the funds to research and
launch them.
Shorter required development time. Companies must learn to compress development time
with new techniques, strategic partners, early concept tests, and advanced marketing planning.
Poor launch timing. New products are sometimes launched after the category has already
taken off or when there is still insufficient interest.
Shorter product life cycles. Rivals are quick to copy success. Sony used to enjoy a three-year
lead on its new products. Now Matsushita can copy them within six months, barely leaving
Sony time to recoup its investment.
Organizational support. The new product may not mesh with the corporate culture or
receive the financial or other support it needs.

But failure comes with the territory, and truly innovative firms accept it as part of what’s needed
to be successful. Silicon Valley marketing expert Seth Godin maintains: “It is not just OK to fail; it’s
imperative to fail.”25 Many Web companies are the result of failed earlier ventures and experience
numerous failures as their services evolve. Dogster.com, a social network site for dog lovers,
emerged after the spectacular demise of Pets.com.26
Initial failure is not always the end of the road for an idea. Recognizing that 90 percent of
experimental drugs are unsuccessful, Eli Lilly looks at failure as an inevitable part of discovery. Its
scientists are encouraged to find new uses for compounds that fail at any stage in a human clinical
trial. Evista, a failed contraceptive, became a $1 billion-a-year drug for osteoporosis. Strattera
was unsuccessful as an antidepressant, but became a top seller for attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. One promising cardiovascular drug in development started as an asthma project.27

Organizational Arrangements
Many companies use customer-driven engineering to develop new products, incorporating customer preferences in the final design. Some rely on internal changes to develop more successful
new products. Consider Johnson & Johnson.

Johnson &
Johnson

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

Johnson & Johnson

To improve the odds for new-product success in its
growing medical device business, Johnson & Johnson has made a number of changes. First, it is
trying to replicate the dynamic venture-capital world within the company by creating internal
start-ups that seek financing from other J&J units. J&J is also pushing for greater input from
doctors and insurers to provide stronger assurance that any devices it introduces will be highly
desirable, feasible, and cost-effective. The Ethicon-Endo unit designed new surgical clips based on discussions with physicians about the need to make surgery less invasive. J&J also put one of its most successful
scientists in the newly created position of chief science and technology officer, to encourage collaboration between J&J’s different businesses and overcome barriers in its decentralized structure. One notable success:
the $2.6 billion CYPHER drug-coated stent.28
New-product development requires senior management to define business domains, product
categories, and specific criteria. One company established the following acceptance criteria:
•
•
•
•

The product can be introduced within five years.
The product has a market potential of at least $50 million and a 15 percent growth rate.
The product can provide at least 30 percent return on sales and 40 percent on investment.
The product can achieve technical or market leadership.

Budgeting for New-Product Development
R&D outcomes are so uncertain that it is difficult to use normal investment criteria when budgeting for new-product development. Some companies simply finance as many projects as possible,
hoping to achieve a few winners. Other companies apply a conventional percentage-of-sales figure
or spend what the competition spends. Still others decide how many successful new products they
need and work backward to estimate the required investment.
Table 20.1 shows how a company might calculate the cost of new-product development. The
new-products manager at a large consumer packaged-goods company reviewed 64 ideas. Sixteen
passed the screening stage and cost $1,000 each to review at this point. Half those, or eight, survived the
concept-testing stage, at a cost of $20,000 each. Half of these, or four, survived the productdevelopment stage, at a cost of $200,000 each. Two did well in the test market, costing $500,000 each.
When they were launched, at a cost of $5 million each, one was highly successful. Thus, this one successful idea cost the company $5,721,000 to develop, while 63 others fell by the wayside for a total development cost of $13,984,000. Unless the company can improve its pass ratios and reduce costs at each
stage, it will need to budget nearly $14 million for each successful new idea it hopes to find.
Hit rates vary. Inventor Sir James Dyson claims he made 5,127 prototypes of his bagless, transparent vacuum cleaner over a 14-year period before getting it right, resulting in the best-selling vacuum
cleaner by revenue in the United States with over 20 million sold and annual revenue of $1 billion. He
doesn’t lament his failures, though: “If you want to discover something that other people haven’t, you

TABLE 20.1

Finding One Successful New Product (Starting with
64 New Ideas)
Number
of Ideas

Pass
Ratio

Cost per
Product Idea

1. Idea screening

64

1:4

$

2. Concept testing

16

1:2

20,000

320,000

3. Product development

8

1:2

200,000

1,600,000

4. Test marketing

4

1:2

500,000

2,000,000

5. National launch

2

1:2

5,000,000

10,000,000

$5,721,000

$13,984,000

Stage

1,000

Total Cost
$

64,000

| CHAPTER 20

571

572

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

need to do things the wrong way . . . watching why that fails can take you on a completely different path.” His latest successes: the Airblade, an energy-efficient hand drier
for public restrooms, and the Air Multiplier, a bladeless table fan.29

Organizing New-Product Development

Adobe Systems
Inc.

Companies handle the organizational aspect of new-product development in several
ways.30 Many assign responsibility to product managers. But product managers are
often busy managing existing lines and may lack the skills and knowledge to develop
and critique new products.
Kraft and Johnson & Johnson employ new-product managers who report to
category managers. Westinghouse has growth leaders—a full-time job for its most
creative and successful managers.31 Some companies have a high-level management
committee charged with reviewing and approving proposals. Large companies often
establish a new-product department headed by a manager with substantial authority
and access to top management whose responsibilities include generating and screening new ideas, working with the R&D department, and carrying out field testing and
commercialization.

Inventor Sir James Dyson is
willing to endure many failed
prototypes as long as he comes
up with a winner, like the Air
Multiplier bladeless table fan.

Adobe Systems Inc.

Adobe Systems, a developer of
graphic design and publishing software, established a task force to identify
the obstacles its employees faced in trying to develop new products. The team
discovered that ideas needing a new sales channel, new business model, or
even new packaging failed due to the corporate hierarchy. In addition, Adobe had
grown so large that ideas originating in branch offices were not getting a fair shake. As a result, Adobe established a New Business Initiatives Group that mimics the venture capital model, backing
entrepreneurial people and putting employees in front of their ideas. The Group holds quarterly Idea
Champion Showcases where approximately 20 product managers and other employees (except top executives who are barred from the proceedings) watch as potential employee-entrepreneurs give brief presentations and Q&A sessions. The ideas are vetted by Adobe Entrepreneurs-in-Residence and the best ideas are
given a first round of funding. But even ideas that are nixed can still get a hearing on the company’s brainstorming site. The event has become extremely popular within Adobe—an American Idol–style way for good ideas to
come to the fore.32

CROSS-FUNCTIONAL TEAMS 3M, Dow, and General Mills have assigned new-product
development to venture teams, cross-functional groups charged with developing a specific product
or business. These “intrapreneurs” are relieved of other duties and given a budget, time frame, and
“skunkworks” setting. Skunkworks are informal workplaces, sometimes garages, where
intrapreneurial teams attempt to develop new products.
Cross-functional teams can collaborate and use concurrent new-product development to push
new products to market.33 Concurrent product development resembles a rugby match, with team
members passing the new product back and forth as they head toward the goal. Using this system,
Allen-Bradley Corporation (a maker of industrial controls) was able to develop a new device in just
two years, down from six under its old system. Cross-functional teams help ensure that engineers
are not driven to create a “better mousetrap” when potential customers don’t need or want one.

STAGE-GATE SYSTEMS Many top companies use the stage-gate system to divide the innovation
process into stages, with a gate or checkpoint at the end of each.34 The project leader, working with a
cross-functional team, must bring a set of known deliverables to each gate before the project can
pass to the next stage. To move from the business plan stage into product development requires a
convincing market research study of consumer needs and interest, a competitive analysis, and a
technical appraisal. Senior managers review the criteria at each gate to make one of four decisions:
go, kill, hold, or recycle. Stage-gate systems make the innovation process visible to all and clarify the
project leader’s and team’s responsibilities at each stage.35 The gates or controls should not be so
rigid, however, that they inhibit learning and the development of novel products.36

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

| CHAPTER 20

Yes
Yes

Yes

1. Idea
generation

2. Idea
screening

Is the
idea worth
considering?

Is the product
idea compatible
with company
objectives,
strategies, and
resources?

Yes

Yes

3. Concept
development
and testing

4. Marketing
strategy
development

Can we find a
good concept
consumers say
they would try?

Can we find a
cost-effective,
affordable
marketing
strategy?

Yes

Yes

Yes

5. Business
analysis

6. Product
development

7. Market
testing

8.
Commercialization

Will this
product meet
our profit
goal?

Have we got a
technically and
commercially
sound product?

Have product
sales met
expectations?

Are product sales
meeting
expectations?

Yes
No

Send the idea
back for product
development?

No

No

No

No

No

Make
future
plans

No

Drop

|Fig. 20.1|

The New-Product Development Decision Process

The stages in the new-product development process are shown in
Figure 20.1. Many firms
have parallel sets of projects working through the process, each at a different stage.37 Think of the
process as a funnel: A large number of initial new-product ideas and concepts are winnowed down
to a few high-potential products that are ultimately launched. But the process is not always linear.
Many firms use a spiral development process that recognizes the value of returning to an earlier stage
to make improvements before moving forward.38
Ansell Healthcare, the world’s largest manufacturer of protective gloves and clothing, adopted a
stage-gate process and found the contribution of new products to overall sales jumped from
4.5 percent to 13 percent in a little over two years. Hydro Quebec, one of the world’s largest hydroelectricity utilities, implemented a stage-gate system that focused resources on the most valuable
projects and reaped over $1 billion in benefits.39

Managing the Development
Process: Ideas
Generating Ideas
The new-product development process starts with the search for ideas. Some marketing experts
believe the greatest opportunities and highest leverage with new products are found by uncovering
the best possible set of unmet customer needs or technological innovation.40 New-product ideas
can come from interacting with various groups and using creativity-generating techniques.41 (See
“Marketing Memo: Ten Ways to Find Great New-Product Ideas.”)
Erich Joachimsthaler believes some of the best new-product opportunities are right in front of
marketers’ eyes. The mistake too many make, he says, is to view the world from the perspective of
their own products and services and search for customers for them. His demand-first innovation

No

No

Modify the product
or marketing
program?

No

Yes

573

574

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

marketing
Ten Ways to Find Great New-Product Ideas

Memo

1. Run informal sessions where groups of customers meet with company
engineers and designers to discuss problems and needs and brainstorm potential solutions.
2. Allow time off—scouting time—for technical people to putter on their
own pet projects. Google has allowed 20 percent time off; 3M 15 percent;
and Rohm & Haas 10 percent.

6. Use iterative rounds: a group of customers in one room, focusing on
identifying problems, and a group of your technical people in the next
room, listening and brainstorming solutions. Immediately test proposed
solutions with the group of customers.
7. Set up a keyword search that routinely scans trade publications in
multiple countries for new-product announcements.

3. Make a customer brainstorming session a standard feature of plant
tours.

8. Treat trade shows as intelligence missions, where you view all that is
new in your industry under one roof.

4. Survey your customers: Find out what they like and dislike in your and
competitors’ products.

9. Have your technical and marketing people visit your suppliers’ labs and
spend time with their technical people—find out what’s new.

5. Undertake “fly-on-the-wall” or “camping out” research with customers,
as do Fluke and Hewlett-Packard.

10. Set up an idea vault, and make it open and easily accessed. Allow
employees to review the ideas and add constructively to them.

Source: Adapted from Robert G. Cooper, Product Leadership: Creating and Launching Superior New Products (New York: Perseus Books, 1998). Adapted with permission from
the author. See also Robert G. Cooper and Scott J. Edgett, “Ideation for Product Innovation: What are the Best Methods?: Visions,” March 2008, pp. 12–17.

and growth (DIG) framework is designed to provide companies with an unbiased view and an
outside-in perspective of demand opportunities. It has three parts:42
1.
2.
3.

The demand landscape—Use observational, anthropological, and ethnographic methods or
consumer self-reports to map consumer needs, wants, and even beyond.
The opportunity space—Use conceptual lens and structured innovative-thinking tools to
achieve market perspectives from different angles.
The strategic blueprint—Think about how the new product can fit into customers lives and
how it can be distinguished from competitors.

As one DIG-type application, Joachimsthaler notes how Intel famously abandoned its highly competitive memory business to pursue more fertile opportunities with microprocessors.

INTERACTING WITH OTHERS Encouraged by the open innovation movement, many firms
are going outside their bounds to tap external sources of new ideas, including customers,
employees, scientists, engineers, channel members, marketing agencies, top management, and even
competitors.43 “Marketing Insight: P&G’s New Connect-and-Develop Approach to Innovation”
describes how P&G has made new-product development more externally focused.

Marketing Insight
P&G’S New Connect 
Develop Approach to Innovation
In the first decade of the 21st century, one of the fastest-growing major
corporations in revenue and profit was Procter & Gamble. Fueling that
growth were successful new products such as Swiffer, Mr. Clean Magic

Eraser, and Actonel (a prescription medication for osteoporosis). Many of
these new products reflected innovation in what ex-CEO A.G. Lafley
calls “the core”—core markets, categories, brands, technologies, and
capabilities.
To more effectively develop its core, P&G adopted a “Connect 
Develop” model that emphasizes the pursuit of outside innovation. The
firm collaborates with organizations and individuals around the world,
searching for proven technologies, packages, and products it can
improve, scale up, and market on its own or in partnership with other
companies. It has strong relationships with external designers, distributing product development around the world to increase what it calls
“consumer sensing.”
P&G identifies the top 10 customer needs, closely related products
that could leverage or benefit from existing brand equity, and “game
boards” that map the adoption of technology across different product

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

categories. It may consult government and private labs as well as academic and other research institutions, VC firms, individual entrepreneurs,
and suppliers, retailers, competitors, and development and trade partners, using online networks to reach thousands of experts worldwide.
P&G’s three core requirements for a successful Connect  Develop
strategy are:
1. Never assume that “ready to go” ideas found outside are truly ready
to go. There will always be development work to do, including
risky scale-up.
2. Don’t underestimate the internal resources required. You’ll need a
full-time, senior executive to run any connect-and-develop initiative.
3. Never launch without a mandate from the CEO. Connect and
develop cannot succeed if it’s cordoned off in R&D. It must be a
top-down, company-wide strategy.

575

Through Connect  Develop—and improvements in product cost,
design, and marketing—P&G increased R&D productivity by nearly 60
percent during the decade. The innovation success rate more than doubled, and cost has fallen.
Sources: www.pgconnectdevelop.com A.G. Lafley and Ram Charan, The Game
Changer: How You Can Drive Revenue and Profit Growth Through Innovation (New
York: Crown Business, 2009); Robert Berner, “How P&G Pampers New Thinking,”
BusinessWeek, April 14, 2008, pp. 73–74; Steve Hamm, “Speed Demons,”
BusinessWeek, March 27, 2006, pp. 69–76; Larry Huston and Nabil Sakkab,
“Connect and Develop: Inside Procter & Gamble’s New Model for Innovation,”
Harvard Business Review, March 2006, pp. 58–66; Geoff Colvin, “Lafley and
Immelt: In Search of Billions,” Fortune, December 11, 2006, pp. 70–72; Rajat Gupta
and Jim Wendler, “Leading Change: An Interview with the CEO of P&G,” McKinsey
Quarterly (July 2005).

Customer needs and wants are the logical place to start the
search.44 Griffin and Hauser suggest that conducting 10 to 20 in-depth
experiential interviews per market segment often uncovers the vast
majority of customer needs.45 But other approaches can be profitable
(see “Marketing Memo: Seven Ways to Draw New Ideas from Your
Customers”). One marketer-sponsored café in Tokyo tests products of
all kinds with affluent, influential young Japanese women.46
The traditional company-centric approach to product innovation
is giving way to a world in which companies cocreate products with
consumers.47 Companies are increasingly turning to “crowdsourcing” to generate new ideas or, as we saw in the preceding chapter, to
create consumer-generated marketing campaigns. Crowdsourcing
means inviting the Internet community to help create content or software, often with prize money or a moment of glory as an incentive.48
This strategy has helped create new products and companies such
as Wikipedia, YouTube (which was eventually purchased by Google),
and iStockphoto, a “microstock” company. One recent convert to
crowdsourcing is Cisco.49

Cisco

Cisco’s I-Prize, an external innovation competition, gives a team outside the company the chance to join Cisco in heading an emerging technology business while receiving a
$250,000 signing bonus and up to $10 million in funding for the first two years. Cisco’s rationale for the contest—which drew 1,200 entrants from 104 countries—was simple: “In many
parts of the world, you have incredibly smart people with incredibly great ideas who have
absolutely no access to capital to take a great idea and turn it into a business.” Judges applied five main
criteria: (1) Does it address a real pain point? (2) Will it appeal to a big enough market? (3) Is the timing right?
(4) If we pursue the idea, will we be good at it? and (5) Can we exploit the opportunity for the long term? The
public judged the entries online, where Cisco found the detailed comments even more useful than the actual
votes. The winning entry in the first competition was a plan for a sensor-enabled smart-electricity grid.
Cisco

| CHAPTER 20

Besides producing new and better ideas, cocreation can help customers to feel closer to and
more favorably toward the company and to create favorable word of mouth.50 Getting the right
customers engaged in the right way, however, is critical.51
Lead users can be a good source of input, even when they innovate products without the consent or knowledge of the companies that produce them. Mountain bikes developed as a result of
youngsters taking their bikes to the top of a mountain and riding down. When the bikes broke, the

P&G’s Connect + Develop
approach to innovation enabled
Swiffer Dusters to make the leap
to global market success.

576

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

marketing

Memo

Seven Ways to Draw New Ideas from Your Customers

1. Observe how customers are using your product. Medtronic, a
medical device company, has salespeople and market researchers
regularly observe spine surgeons who use their products and competitive
products, to learn how theirs can be improved. After living with lowermiddle-class families in Mexico City, Procter & Gamble researchers
devised Downy Single Rinse, a fabric softener that removed an arduous
step from the partly manual laundry process there.
2. Ask customers about their problems with your products. Komatsu
Heavy Equipment sent a group of engineers and designers to the United
States for six months to ride with equipment drivers and learn how to
make products better. Procter & Gamble, recognizing consumers were
frustrated that potato chips break and are difficult to save after opening
the bag, designed Pringles to be uniform in size and encased in a protective tennis-ball-type can.
3. Ask customers about their dream products. Ask your customers
what they want your product to do, even if the ideal sounds impossible.
One 70-year-old camera user told Minolta he would like the camera to
make his subjects look better and not show their wrinkles and aging. In
response, Minolta produced a camera with two lenses, one for rendering
softer images of the subjects.
4. Use a customer advisory board to comment on your company’s
ideas. Levi Strauss uses youth panels to discuss lifestyles, habits,

values, and brand engagements; Cisco runs Customer Forums to improve its offerings; and Harley-Davidson solicits product ideas from its
one million H.O.G. (Harley Owners Group) members.
5. Use Web sites for new ideas. Companies can use specialized search
engines such as Technorati and Daypop to find blogs and postings
relevant to their businesses. P&G’s site has We’re Listening and Share
Your Thoughts sections and Advisory Feedback sessions to gain advice
and feedback from customers.
6. Form a brand community of enthusiasts who discuss your product.
Harley-Davidson and Apple have strong brand enthusiasts and
advocates; Sony engaged in collaborative dialogues with consumers to
codevelop Sony’s PlayStation 2. LEGO draws on kids and influential adult
enthusiasts for feedback on new-product concepts in early stages of
development.
7. Encourage or challenge your customers to change or improve your
product. Salesforce.com wants its users to develop and share new
software applications using simple programming tools. International
Flavors & Fragrances gives a toolkit to its customers to modify specific
flavors, which IFF then manufactures; LSI Logic Corporation also provides
customers with do-it-yourself toolkits so customers can design their own
specialized chips; and BMW posted a toolkit on its Web site to let customers develop ideas using telematics and in-car online services.

Source: From an unpublished paper, Philip Kotler, “Drawing New Ideas from Your Customers,” 2007.

youngsters began building more durable bikes and adding motorcycle brakes,
improved suspension, and accessories. They, not the companies, developed these
innovations.
Some companies, particularly those that want to appeal to hip young consumers,
bring their lead users into their product-design process. Technical companies can
learn a great deal by studying customers who make the most advanced use of
the company’s products and who recognize the need for improvements before other
customers do.52 In a business-to-business market, collecting information from distributors and retailers who are not in close contact can provide more diverse insights
and information.53
Not everyone believes a customer focus helps to create better new products. As
Henry Ford famously said, “If I’d asked people what they wanted, they would have said
a faster horse.” And some still caution that being overly focused on consumers who may
not really know what they want, or what could be possible, can result in shortsighted
product development and miss real potential breakthroughs.54

INTERACTING WITH EMPLOYEES Employees can be a source of ideas for

Some of the best new-product ideas
come from highly involved consumers or lead users, as was the case
in the birth of the mountain bike.

improving production, products, and services.55 Toyota claims its employees submit
2 million ideas annually (about 35 suggestions per employee), over 85 percent of which
are implemented. Kodak, Milliken, and other firms give monetary, holiday, or
recognition awards to employees who submit the best ideas. Nokia inducts engineers
who file for at least 10 patents into its “Club 10,” recognizing them each year in a formal
awards ceremony hosted by the company’s CEO.56 A company can motivate its
employees to submit new ideas to an idea manager whose name and contact
information are widely circulated.
Top management can be another major source of ideas. Some company leaders, such as former
CEO Andy Grove of Intel, take personal responsibility for technological innovation in the firm. Newproduct ideas can come from inventors, patent attorneys, university and commercial laboratories,

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

| CHAPTER 20

577

industrial consultants, advertising agencies, marketing research firms, and industrial publications.
However, their chances of receiving serious attention often depend on someone in the organization
taking the role of product champion.

STUDYING COMPETITORS Companies can find good ideas by researching the products and
services of competitors and other companies. They can find out what customers like and dislike
about competitors’ products. They can buy their competitors’ products, take them apart, and build
better ones. Company sales representatives and intermediaries are a particularly good source of
ideas. These groups have firsthand exposure to customers and are often the first to learn about
competitive developments. Electronic retailer Best Buy actually checks with venture capitalists to
find out what start-ups are working on.
ADOPTING CREATIVITY TECHNIQUES Internal brainstorming sessions also can be
quite effective—if conducted correctly. “Marketing Memo: How to Run a Successful Brainstorming
Session” provides some brainstorming guidelines.
The following list is a sampling of techniques for stimulating creativity in individuals and groups.57
•

•

•

•

Attribute listing. List the attributes of an object, such as a screwdriver. Then modify each attribute, such as replacing the wooden handle with plastic, providing torque power, adding different screw heads, and so on.
Forced relationships. List several ideas and consider each in relationship to each of the others.
In designing new office furniture, for example, consider a desk, bookcase, and filing cabinet as
separate ideas. Then imagine a desk with a built-in bookcase or a desk with built-in files or a
bookcase with built-in files.
Morphological analysis. Start with a problem, such as “getting something from one place to
another via a powered vehicle.” Now think of dimensions, such as the type of platform (cart,
chair, sling, bed), the medium (air, water, oil, rails), and the power source (compressed air,
electric motor, magnetic fields). By listing every possible combination, you can generate many
new solutions.
Reverse assumption analysis. List all the normal assumptions about an entity and then reverse them. Instead of assuming that a restaurant has menus, charges for food, and serves food,
reverse each assumption. The new restaurant may decide to serve only what the chef bought
that morning and cooked; may provide some food and charge only for how long the person
sits at the table; and may design an exotic atmosphere and rent out the space to people who
bring their own food and beverages.

marketing

Memo

How to Run a Successful Brainstorming Session

If done correctly, group brainstorming sessions can create insights, ideas,
and solutions that would have been impossible without everyone’s participation. If done incorrectly, they are a painful waste of time that can frustrate
and antagonize participants. To ensure success, experts recommend the following guidelines:

5. Participants must be given proper background preparation and materials
so they can get into the task quickly.

1. A trained facilitator should guide the session.
2. Participants must feel they can express themselves freely.

7. Brainstorming sessions must lead to a clear plan of action and implementation, so the ideas that materialize can provide tangible value.

3. Participants must see themselves as collaborators working toward a
common goal.

8. Brainstorming sessions can do more than just generate ideas—they can
help build teams and leave participants better informed and energized.

6. Individual sessions before and after the brainstorming can be useful for
thinking and learning about the topic ahead of time and for reflecting
afterward on what happened.

4. Rules need to be set up and followed, so conversations don’t get off track.
Sources: Linda Tischler, “Be Creative: You Have 30 Seconds,” Fast Company, May 2007, pp. 47–50; Michael Myser, “When Brainstorming Goes Bad,” Business 2.0, October
2006, p. 76; Robert I. Sutton, “Eight Rules to Brilliant Brainstorming,” BusinessWeek IN Inside Innovation, September 2006, pp. 17–21.

578

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

•

•

New contexts. Take familiar processes, such as people-helping services, and put
them into a new context. Imagine helping dogs and cats instead of people with
day care service, stress reduction, psychotherapy, funerals, and so on. As another
example, instead of sending hotel guests to the front desk to check in, greet
them at curbside and use a wireless device to register them.
Mind mapping. Start with a thought, such as a car, write it on a piece of paper,
then think of the next thought that comes up (say Mercedes), link it to car, then
think of the next association (Germany), and do this with all associations that
come up with each new word. Perhaps a whole new idea will materialize.

Increasingly, new-product ideas arise from lateral marketing that combines
two product concepts or ideas to create a new offering.58 Here are some successful
examples:
•
•
•
•
•

Gas station stores = gas stations + food
Cybercafés = cafeteria + Internet
Cereal bars = cereal + snacking
Kinder Surprise = candy + toy
Sony Walkman = audio + portable

Using Idea Screening
In screening ideas, the company must avoid two types of errors. A DROP-error
occurs when the company dismisses a good idea. It is extremely easy to find fault
with other people’s ideas (
Figure 20.2). Some companies shudder when they
look back at ideas they dismissed or breathe sighs of relief when they realize how
close they came to dropping what eventually became a huge success. Consider the hit
television show Friends.

Friends

An example of lateral marketing,
Kinder Surprise combines two
product concepts—candy and
toy—into one product offering.

Friends The NBC situation comedy Friends enjoyed a 10-year run from 1994 to 2004

as a perennial ratings powerhouse. But the show almost didn’t see the light of the day. According
to an internal NBC research report, the pilot episode was described as “not very entertaining,
clever, or original” and was given a failing grade, scoring 41 out of 100. Ironically, the pilot for an
earlier hit sitcom, Seinfeld, was also rated “weak,” although the pilot for the medical drama ER
scored a healthy 91. Courtney Cox’s Monica was the Friends character who scored best with test audiences,
but characters portrayed by Lisa Kudrow and Matthew Perry were deemed to have marginal appeal, and the
Rachel, Ross, and Joey characters scored even lower. Adults 35 and over in the sample found the characters
as a whole “smug, superficial, and self-absorbed.”59
The purpose of screening is to drop poor ideas as early as possible. The rationale is that productdevelopment costs rise substantially with each successive development stage. Most companies
require new-product ideas to be described on a standard form for a new-product committee’s
review. The description states the product idea, the target market, and the competition and roughly
estimates market size, product price, development time and costs, manufacturing costs, and rate
of return.
The executive committee then reviews each idea against a set of criteria. Does the product meet
a need? Would it offer superior value? Can it be distinctively advertised? Does the company have
the necessary know-how and capital? Will the new product deliver the expected sales volume, sales
growth, and profit? Consumer input may be necessary to tap into marketplace realities.60
Management can rate the surviving ideas using a weighted-index method like that in
Table 20.2.
The first column lists factors required for successful product launches, and the second column
assigns importance weights. The third column scores the product idea on a scale from 0 to 1.0, with
1.0 the highest score. The final step multiplies each factor’s importance by the product score to
obtain an overall rating. In this example, the product idea scores 0.69, which places it in the “good
idea” level. The purpose of this basic rating device is to promote systematic evaluation and discussion.
It is not supposed to make the decision for management.

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

579

Product–Idea Rating Device

TABLE 20.2
Product Success
Requirements

Relative
Weight (a)

Product
Score (b)

Product Rating
(c = a  b)

Unique or superior product

.40

.8

.32

High performance-to-cost ratio

.30

.6

.18

High marketing dollar support

.20

.7

.14

Lack of strong competition

.10

.5

.05

Total

1.00

a

| CHAPTER 20

.69a

"I've got a great idea!"

"It won't work here."

Rating scale: .00–.30 poor; .31–.60 fair; .61–.80 good. Minimum acceptance rate: .61

As the idea moves through development, the company will need to constantly revise its estimate
of the product’s overall probability of success, using the following formula:
Overall
probability
of success



Probability
of technical
completion



Probability of
commercialization
given technical
completion



"We've tried it before."

Probability of
economic
success given
commercialization

For example, if the three probabilities are estimated at 0.50, 0.65, and 0.74, respectively, the overall probability of success is 0.24. The company then must judge whether this probability is high
enough to warrant continued development.

Managing the Development
Process: Concept to Strategy
Attractive ideas must be refined into testable product concepts. A product idea is a possible product
the company might offer to the market. A product concept is an elaborated version of the idea expressed in consumer terms.

Concept Development and Testing
Concept development is a necessary but not sufficient step for new product success. Marketers
must also distinguish winning concepts from losers.

"This isn't the right time."

"It can't be done."

"It's not the way
we do things."

"We've done all
right without it."

CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT Let us illustrate concept development with the following
situation: A large food-processing company gets the idea of producing a powder to add to milk to
increase its nutritional value and taste. This is a product idea, but consumers don’t buy product
ideas; they buy product concepts.
A product idea can be turned into several concepts. The first question is: Who will use this product? It can be aimed at infants, children, teenagers, young or middle-aged adults, or older adults.
Second, what primary benefit should this product provide: Taste, nutrition, refreshment, or energy?
Third, when will people consume this drink: Breakfast, midmorning, lunch, midafternoon, dinner,
late evening? By answering these questions, a company can form several concepts:
•
•
•

Concept 1. An instant drink for adults who want a quick nutritious breakfast without
preparation.
Concept 2. A tasty snack for children to drink as a midday refreshment.
Concept 3. A health supplement for older adults to drink in the late evening before they go to bed.

Each concept represents a category concept that defines the product’s competition. An instant
breakfast drink would compete against bacon and eggs, breakfast cereals, coffee and pastry, and
other breakfast alternatives. A snack drink would compete against soft drinks, fruit juices, sports
drinks, and other thirst quenchers.

"It will cost too much."

"Let's discuss it at
our next meeting."

|Fig. 20.2|

Forces Fighting
New Ideas
Source: With permission of Jerold Panas, Young &
Partners Inc.

580

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

(a) Product-positioning Map
(Breakfast Market)
Expensive
Bacon
and eggs

Cold
cereal

Slow

Quick
Pancakes
Hot Instant
cereal breakfast
Inexpensive

(b) Brand-positioning Map
(Instant Breakfast Market)
High price per ounce

Brand A

Brand B

Segment 1 Segment 2

High in calories

Low in calories

Brand C
Segment 3 Segment 4

Low price per ounce

|Fig. 20.3|

Product and Brand
Positioning

Suppose the instant-breakfast-drink concept looks best. The next task is to show where this
powdered product would stand in relationship to other breakfast products via perceptual mapping.
Figure 20.3(a) uses the two dimensions of cost and preparation time to create a
product-positioning map for the breakfast drink. An instant breakfast drink offers low cost and
quick preparation. Its nearest competitor is cold cereal or breakfast bars; its most distant is bacon
and eggs. These contrasts can help communicate and promote the concept to the market.
Next, the product concept becomes a brand concept. Figure 20.3(b) is a brand-positioning map, a
perceptual map showing the current positions of three existing brands of instant breakfast drinks
(A–C), as seen by consumers. It can also be useful to overlay consumer preferences on to the map
in terms of their current or desired preferences. Figure 20.3(b) also shows four segments of consumers (1–4) whose preferences are clustered around the points on the map.
The brand-positioning map helps the company to decide how much to charge and how calorific
to make its drink. Three segments (1–3) are well served by existing brands (A–C). The company
would not want to position itself next to one of those existing brands, unless that brand is weak or
inferior or market demand was high enough to be shared. As it turns out, the new brand would be
distinctive in the medium-price, medium-calorie market or in the high-price, high-calorie market.
There is also a segment of consumers (4) clustered fairly near the medium-price, medium-calorie
market, suggesting that this may offer the greatest opportunity.

CONCEPT TESTING Concept testing means presenting the product concept to target
consumers, physically or symbolically, and getting their reactions. The more the tested concepts
resemble the final product or experience, the more dependable concept testing is. Concept testing
of prototypes can help avoid costly mistakes, but it may be especially challenging with radically
different, new-to-the-world products.61 Visualization techniques can help respondents match their
mental state with what might occur when they are actually evaluating or choosing the new
product.62
In the past, creating physical prototypes was costly and time consuming, but today firms can use
rapid prototyping to design products on a computer and then produce rough models to show potential consumers for their reactions. In response to a short-term oversupply of wine in the marketplace, the makers of Kendall-Jackson developed two new brands by using rapid prototyping to
quickly bring its ideas to life, selling 100,000 cases, 10 times more than expected, for each brand in
the process.63
Companies are also using virtual reality to test product concepts. Virtual reality programs use
computers and sensory devices (such as gloves or goggles) to simulate reality. Supercomputers also
allow for elaborate product testing to assess changes in performance and supplement consumer
input. Kenworth trucks used to test new truck designs with clay models and wind tunnels. Using
supercomputer analysis, it can now make more accurate estimates of how much drag and fuel use
it can eliminate with new trimmed and tapered mud flaps (answer: $400 of a typical truck’s annual
gas bill).64
Concept testing presents consumers with an elaborated version of the concept. Here is the elaboration of concept 1 in our milk example:
Our product is a powdered mixture added to milk to make an instant breakfast that gives
all the day’s needed nutrition along with good taste and high convenience. The product
comes in three flavors (chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry) and individual packets, six to a
box, at $2.49 a box.
After receiving this information, researchers measure product dimensions by having consumers
respond to questions like these:
1.
2.
3.

4.

Communicability and believability—“Are the benefits clear to you and believable?” If the
scores are low, the concept must be refined or revised.
Need level—“Do you see this product solving a problem or filling a need for you?” The
stronger the need, the higher the expected consumer interest.
Gap level—“Do other products currently meet this need and satisfy you?” The greater the gap,
the higher the expected consumer interest. Marketers can multiply the need level by the gap
level to produce a need-gap score. A high score means the consumer sees the product as filling
a strong need not satisfied by available alternatives.
Perceived value—“Is the price reasonable in relationship to value?” The higher the perceived
value, the higher is expected consumer interest.

| CHAPTER 20

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

581

Conjoint analysis was instrumental in the design of Courtyard by
Marriott.

5.

6.

Purchase intention—“Would you (definitely, probably, probably not, definitely not) buy the
product?” Consumers who answered the first three questions positively should answer
“Definitely” here.
User targets, purchase occasions, purchasing frequency—“Who would use this product,
when, and how often?”

Respondents’ answers indicate whether the concept has a broad and strong consumer appeal,
what products it competes against, and which consumers are the best targets. The need-gap levels
and purchase-intention levels can be checked against norms for the product category to see
whether the concept appears to be a winner, a long shot, or a loser. One food manufacturer rejects
any concept that draws a definitely-would-buy score lower than 40 percent.

CONJOINT ANALYSIS Consumer preferences for alternative product concepts can be
measured with conjoint analysis, a method for deriving the utility values that consumers attach to
varying levels of a product’s attributes.65 Conjoint analysis has become one of the most popular
concept-development and testing tools. For example, Marriott used it to design its Courtyard hotel
concept.66
With conjoint analysis, respondents see different hypothetical offers formed by combining
varying levels of the attributes, then rank the various offers. Management can identify the most
appealing offer and its estimated market share and profit. In a classic illustration, academic
research pioneers Green and Wind used this approach in connection with developing a new spotremoving, carpet-cleaning agent for home use.67 Suppose the new-product marketer is considering
five design elements:
•
•
•
•
•

Three package designs (A, B, C—see
Figure 20.4)
Three brand names (K2R, Glory, Bissell)
Three prices ($1.19, $1.39, $1.59)
A possible Good Housekeeping seal (yes, no)
A possible money-back guarantee (yes, no)

Although the researcher can form 108 possible product concepts (3  3  3  2  2), it would
be too much to ask consumers to rank them all from most to least preferred. A sample of, say,
18 contrasting product concepts is feasible.
The marketer now uses a statistical program to derive the consumer’s utility functions for each
of the five attributes (see
Figure 20.5). Utility ranges between zero and one; the higher the utility, the stronger the consumer’s preference for that level of the attribute. Looking at packaging,
package B is the most favored, followed by C and then A (A hardly has any utility). The preferred
names are Bissell, K2R, and Glory, in that order. The consumer’s utility varies inversely with price.

A

B

C

|Fig. 20.4|

Samples for Conjoint
Analysis

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Package Design

|Fig. 20.5|

1.0

1.0

Utility

1.0

Utility

0

0
A

B

0
K2R

C

Glory

Bissell

Good Housekeeping Seal?
1.0

$1.19

$1.39

$1.59

Money-Back Guarantee?
1.0

Utility

Utility Functions
Based on Conjoint
Analysis

Retail Price

Brand Name

Utility

PART 8

Utility

582

0

0
No

Yes

No

Yes

A Good Housekeeping seal is preferred, but it does not add that much utility and may not be worth
the effort to obtain it. A money-back guarantee is strongly preferred.
The consumer’s most desired offer is package design B, brand name Bissell, priced at $1.19, with
a Good Housekeeping seal and a money-back guarantee. We can also determine the relative importance
of each attribute to this consumer—the difference between the highest and lowest utility level for
that attribute. The greater the difference, the more important the attribute. Clearly, this consumer
sees price and package design as the most important attributes, followed by money-back guarantee,
brand name, and a Good Housekeeping seal.
Preference data from a sufficient sample of target consumers helps to estimate the market
share any specific offer is likely to achieve, given any assumptions about competitive response.
Still, the company may not launch the market offer that promises to gain the greatest market
share, because of cost considerations. The most customer-appealing offer is not always the most
profitable offer to make.
Under some conditions, researchers will collect the data not with a full-profile description of
each offer, but by presenting two factors at a time. For example, respondents may see a table with
three price levels and three package types and indicate which of the nine combinations they would
like most, second-best, and so on. A further table consists of trade-offs between two other variables.
The trade-off approach may be easier to use when there are many variables and possible offers.
However, it is less realistic in that respondents are focusing on only two variables at a time. Adaptive
conjoint analysis (ACA) is a “hybrid” data collection technique that combines self-explicated
importance ratings with pair-wise trade-off tasks.

Marketing Strategy Development
Following a successful concept test, the new-product manager will develop a preliminary three-part
strategy plan for introducing the new product into the market. The first part describes the target
market’s size, structure, and behavior; the planned product positioning; and the sales, market share,
and profit goals sought in the first few years:
The target market for the instant breakfast drink is families with children who are receptive
to a new, convenient, nutritious, and inexpensive form of breakfast. The company’s brand
will be positioned at the higher-price, higher-quality end of the instant-breakfast-drink
category. The company will aim initially to sell 500,000 cases or 10 percent of the market,

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

with a loss in the first year not exceeding $1.3 million. The second year will aim for
700,000 cases or 14 percent of the market, with a planned profit of $2.2 million.

| CHAPTER 20

583

(a) One-time
Purchased Product

The third part of the marketing strategy plan describes the long-run sales and profit goals and
marketing-mix strategy over time:

Time
(b) Infrequently
Purchased Product

Replacement
sales

Sales

The product will be offered in chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry, in individual packets of
six to a box, at a retail price of $2.49 a box. There will be 48 boxes per case, and the case
price to distributors will be $24. For the first two months, dealers will be offered one case
free for every four cases bought, plus cooperative-advertising allowances. Free samples
will be distributed door-to-door. Coupons for 50 cents off will appear in newspapers. The
total sales promotional budget will be $2.9 million. An advertising budget of $6 million
will be split 50:50 between national and local. Two-thirds will go into television and onethird into online. Advertising copy will emphasize the benefit concepts of nutrition and
convenience. The advertising-execution concept will revolve around a small boy who
drinks instant breakfast and grows strong. During the first year, $100,000 will be spent on
marketing research to buy store audits and consumer-panel information to monitor
market reaction and buying rates.

Sales

The second part outlines the planned price, distribution strategy, and marketing budget for the
first year:

The company intends to win a 25 percent market share and realize an after-tax return on
investment of 12 percent. To achieve this return, product quality will start high and be
improved over time through technical research. Price will initially be set at a high level
and lowered gradually to expand the market and meet competition. The total promotion
budget will be boosted each year about 20 percent, with the initial advertising–sales promotion split of 65:35 evolving eventually to 50:50. Marketing research will be reduced to
$60,000 per year after the first year.

Time
(c) Frequently
Purchased Product

Business Analysis

Sales

Repeat purchase
sales

After management develops the product concept and marketing strategy, it can evaluate the proposal’s business attractiveness. Management needs to prepare sales, cost, and profit projections to
determine whether they satisfy company objectives. If they do, the concept can move to the development stage. As new information comes in, the business analysis will undergo revision and expansion.

ESTIMATING TOTAL SALES Total estimated sales are the sum of estimated first-time sales,
replacement sales, and repeat sales. Sales-estimation methods depend on whether the product is
purchased once (such as an engagement ring or retirement home), infrequently, or often. For onetime products, sales rise at the beginning, peak, and approach zero as the number of potential
buyers is exhausted [see
Figure 20.6(a)]. If new buyers keep entering the market, the curve will
not go down to zero.
Infrequently purchased products—such as automobiles, toasters, and industrial equipment—
exhibit replacement cycles dictated by physical wear or obsolescence associated with changing
styles, features, and performance. Sales forecasting for this product category calls for estimating
first-time sales and replacement sales separately [see Figure 20.6(b)].
Frequently purchased products, such as consumer and industrial nondurables, have product lifecycle sales resembling Figure 20.6(c). The number of first-time buyers initially increases and then
decreases as fewer buyers are left (assuming a fixed population). Repeat purchases occur soon,
providing the product satisfies some buyers. The sales curve eventually falls to a plateau representing
a level of steady repeat-purchase volume; by this time, the product is no longer a new product.
In estimating sales, the manager’s first task is to estimate first-time purchases of the new product
in each period. To estimate replacement sales, management researches the product’s survival-age
distribution—that is, the number of units that fail in year one, two, three, and so on. The low end of
the distribution indicates when the first replacement sales will take place. Because replacement sales
are difficult to estimate before the product is in use, some manufacturers base the decision to
launch a new product solely on their estimate of first-time sales.
For a frequently purchased new product, the seller estimates repeat sales as well as first-time
sales. A high rate of repeat purchasing means customers are satisfied; sales are likely to stay high

Time

|Fig. 20.6|

Product Life-Cycle
Sales for Three Types
of Products

584

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

even after all first-time purchases take place. Some products and brands are bought a few times and
dropped. Colgate’s Wisp disposable toothbrush received much trial but repeat sales slowed considerably after that.68

ESTIMATING COSTS AND PROFITS Costs are estimated by the R&D, manufacturing,
marketing, and finance departments.
Table 20.3 illustrates a five-year projection of sales, costs,
and profits for the instant breakfast drink.
Row 1 shows projected sales revenue over the five-year period. The company expects to sell
$11,889,000 (approximately 500,000 cases at $24 per case) in the first year. Behind this projection is
a set of assumptions about the rate of market growth, the company’s market share, and the factoryrealized price. Row 2 shows the cost of goods sold, which hovers around 33 percent of sales revenue.
We find this cost by estimating the average cost of labor, ingredients, and packaging per case. Row 3
shows the expected gross margin, the difference between sales revenue and cost of goods sold.
Row 4 shows anticipated development costs of $3.5 million, including product-development
cost, marketing research costs, and manufacturing development costs. Row 5 shows the estimated
marketing costs over the five-year period to cover advertising, sales promotion, and marketing research and an amount allocated for sales force coverage and marketing administration. Row 6
shows the allocated overhead to this new product to cover its share of the cost of executive salaries,
heat, light, and so on.
Row 7, the gross contribution, is gross margin minus the preceding three costs. Row 8, supplementary contribution, lists any change in income to other company products caused by the newproduct introduction. Dragalong income is additional income to them, and cannibalized income is
reduced income.69 Table 20.3 assumes no supplementary contributions. Row 9 shows net contribution,
which in this case is the same as gross contribution. Row 10 shows discounted contribution—that
is, the present value of each future contribution discounted at 15 percent per annum. For example,
the company will not receive $4,716,000 until the fifth year. This amount is worth only $2,346,000
today if the company can earn 15 percent on its money through other investments.70
Finally, row 11 shows the cumulative discounted cash flow, the accumulation of the annual contributions in row 10. Two points are of central interest. First is the maximum investment exposure,
the highest loss the project can create. The company will be in a maximum loss position of
$4,613,000 in year 1. The second is the payback period, the time when the company recovers all its
investment, including the built-in return of 15 percent. The payback period here is about three and
a half years. Management must decide whether to risk a maximum investment loss of $4.6 million
and a possible payback period of three and a half years. As part of their financial analysis, firms may
conduct a breakeven or risk analysis.

TABLE 20.3

Projected Five-Year Cash Flow Statement (in thousands of dollars)
Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

$

0

$11,889

$ 15,381

$19,654

$28,253

$ 32,491

2. Cost of goods sold

0

3,981

5,150

6,581

9,461

10,880

3. Gross margin

0

7,908

10,231

13,073

18,792

21,611

–3,500

0

0

0

0

0

5. Marketing costs

0

8,000

6,460

8,255

11,866

13,646

6. Allocated overhead

0

1,189

1,538

1,965

2,825

3,249

7. Gross contribution

–3,500

–1,281

2,233

2,853

4,101

4,716

0

0

0

0

0

0

9. Net contribution

–3,500

–1,281

2,233

2,853

4,101

4,716

10. Discounted contribution (15%)

–3,500

–1,113

1,691

1,877

2,343

2,346

11. Cumulative discounted cash flow

–3,500

–4,613

–2,922

–1,045

1,298

3,644

1. Sales revenue

4. Development costs

8. Supplementary contribution

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

Managing the Development
Process: Development to
Commercialization
Up to now, the product has existed only as a word description, a drawing, or a prototype. The next
step represents a jump in investment that dwarfs the costs incurred so far. The company will determine whether the product idea can translate into a technically and commercially feasible product. If
not, the accumulated project cost will be lost, except for any useful information gained in the process.

Product Development
The job of translating target customer requirements into a working prototype is helped by a set of
methods known as quality function deployment (QFD). The methodology takes the list of desired
customer attributes (CAs) generated by market research and turns them into a list of engineering
attributes (EAs) that engineers can use. For example, customers of a proposed truck may want a
certain acceleration rate (CA). Engineers can turn this into the required horsepower and other engineering equivalents (EAs). A major contribution of QFD is improved communication between
marketers, engineers, and manufacturing people.71

PHYSICAL PROTOTYPES The goal of the R&D department is to find a prototype that
embodies the key attributes in the product-concept statement, performs safely under normal use
and conditions, and can be produced within budgeted manufacturing costs. In the past, developing
and manufacturing a successful prototype could take weeks or even years. Sophisticated virtual
reality technology and the Web now permit more rapid prototyping and more flexible
development processes. Simulations, for example, give companies the flexibility to respond to new
information and resolve uncertainties by quickly exploring alternatives.
R&D must also decide how consumers will react to different colors, sizes, and weights.
Historically, a yellow mouthwash supported an “antiseptic” claim (Listerine), red a “refreshing”
claim (Lavoris), and green or blue a “cool” claim (Scope). Marketers need to supply R&D with information about what attributes consumers seek and how they judge whether these are present.
CUSTOMER TESTS When the prototypes are ready, they must be put through rigorous
functional and customer tests before they enter the marketplace. Alpha testing tests the product
within the firm to see how it performs in different applications. After refining the prototype
further, the company moves to beta testing with customers.72
Consumer testing can bring consumers into a laboratory or give them samples to use at home.
Procter & Gamble has on-site labs such as a diaper-testing center where dozens of mothers bring
their babies to be studied. To develop its Cover Girl Outlast all-day lip color, P&G invited 500
women to come to its labs each morning to apply the lipstick, record their activities, and return
eight hours later so it could measure remaining lip color, resulting in a product that came with a
tube of glossy moisturizer that women could apply on top of their color without looking at a mirror. In-home placement tests are common for products from ice cream flavors to new appliances.

Market Testing
After management is satisfied with functional and psychological performance, the product is ready
to be branded with a name, logo, and packaging and go into a market test.
Not all companies undertake market testing. A company officer at Revlon stated: “In our field—
primarily higher-priced cosmetics not geared for mass distribution—it would be unnecessary for
us to market test. When we develop a new product, say an improved liquid makeup, we know it’s
going to sell because we’re familiar with the field. And we’ve got 1,500 demonstrators in department stores to promote it.” Many companies, however, believe market testing can yield valuable information about buyers, dealers, marketing program effectiveness, and market potential. The main
issues are: How much market testing should be done, and what kind(s)?
The amount is influenced by the investment cost and risk on the one hand, and the time pressure and research cost on the other. High-investment–high-risk products, whose chance of failure

| CHAPTER 20

585

586

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Consumer tests are typically an
integral step in the new-product
development process.

is high, must be market tested; the cost will be an insignificant percentage of total project cost.
High-risk products that create new-product categories (first instant breakfast drink) or have novel
features (first gum-strengthening toothpaste) warrant more market testing than modified products
(another toothpaste brand).

CONSUMER-GOODS MARKET TESTING Consumer-products tests seek to estimate four
variables: trial, first repeat, adoption, and purchase frequency. Many consumers may try the product
but not rebuy it, or it might achieve high permanent adoption but low purchase frequency (like
gourmet frozen foods).
Here are four major methods of consumer-goods market testing, from least to most costly.

Sales-Wave Research Consumers who initially try the product at no cost are reoffered it, or a
competitor’s product, at slightly reduced prices. The offer may be made as many as five times (sales
waves), while the company notes how many customers select it again and their reported level of
satisfaction.
Sales-wave research can be implemented quickly, conducted with a fair amount of security, and
carried out without final packaging and advertising. However, because customers are preselected, it
does not indicate trial rates the product would achieve with different sales incentives, nor does it indicate the brand’s power to gain distribution and favorable shelf position.
Simulated Test Marketing Thirty to 40 qualified shoppers are asked about brand familiarity
and preferences in a specific product category and attend a brief screening of both well-known and
new TV commercials or print ads. One ad advertises the new product but is not singled out for
attention. Consumers receive a small amount of money and are invited into a store where they may
buy any items. The company notes how many consumers buy the new brand and competing
brands. This provides a measure of the ad’s relative effectiveness against competing ads in
stimulating trial. Consumers are asked the reasons for their purchases or nonpurchases. Those who
did not buy the new brand are given a free sample. Some weeks later, they are interviewed by phone
to determine product attitudes, usage, satisfaction, and repurchase intention and are offered an
opportunity to repurchase any products.
This method can give some surprisingly accurate results on advertising effectiveness and trial
rates (and repeat rates if extended) in a much shorter time and at a fraction of the cost of using real
test markets.73 As media and channels grow more fragmented, however, it will become harder to
truly simulate market conditions with only traditional approaches.
Controlled Test Marketing The company with the new product specifies the number of stores and
geographic locations it wants to test. A research firm delivers the product to a panel of participating
stores and controls shelf position, pricing, and number of facings, displays, and point-of-purchase
promotions. Electronic scanners measure sales at checkout. The company can also evaluate the impact

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

| CHAPTER 20

587

of local advertising and promotions and interview a sample of customers later to get their impressions
of the product. It does not have to use its own sales force, give trade allowances, or “buy” distribution.
However, controlled test marketing provides no information about how to sell the trade on carrying
the new product. It also exposes the product and its features to competitors’ scrutiny.

Test Markets The ultimate way to test a new consumer product is to put it into full-blown test
markets. The company chooses a few representative cities and puts on a full marketing
communications campaign, and the sales force tries to sell the trade on carrying the product and
giving it good shelf exposure. Test marketing also measures the impact of alternative marketing
plans by implementing them in different cities. A full-scale test can cost over $1 million, depending
on the number of test cities, the test duration, and the amount of data the company wants to collect.
Management faces several decisions:
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.

How many test cities? Most tests use two to six cities. The greater the possible loss, the number of contending marketing strategies, the regional differences, and the chance of test-market
interference by competitors, the more cities management should test.
Which cities? Selection criteria include good media coverage, cooperative chain stores, and average competitive activity. How representative the city is of other markets must also be considered.
Length of test? Market tests last a few months to a year. The longer the average repurchase
period, the longer the test period.
What information to collect? Warehouse shipment data will show gross inventory buying but
will not indicate weekly sales at the retail level. Store audits will show retail sales and competitors’ market shares but will not reveal buyer characteristics. Consumer panels will indicate
which people are buying which brands and their loyalty and switching rates. Buyer surveys will
yield in-depth information about consumer attitudes, usage, and satisfaction.
What action to take? If the test markets show high trial and repurchase rates, the marketer
should launch the product nationally; if a high trial rate and low repurchase rate, redesign or drop
the product; if a low trial rate and high repurchase rate, develop marketing communications to
convince more people to try it. If trial and repurchase rates are both low, abandon the product.
Many managers find it difficult to kill a project that created much effort and attention even if they
should, resulting in an unfortunate (and typically unsuccessful) escalation of commitment.74

Despite its benefits, many companies today skip test marketing and rely on faster and more
economical testing methods. General Mills prefers to launch new products in 25 percent of the
country, an area too large for rivals to disrupt. Managers review retail scanner data, which tell
them within days how the product is doing and what corrective fine-tuning to do. ColgatePalmolive often launches a new product in a set of small “lead countries” and keeps rolling it out
if it proves successful.

BUSINESS-GOODS MARKET TESTING Business goods can also benefit from market
testing. Expensive industrial goods and new technologies will normally undergo alpha and beta
testing. During beta testing, the company’s technical people observe how customers use the
product, a practice that often exposes unanticipated problems of safety and servicing and alerts the
company to customer training and servicing requirements. The company can also observe how
much value the equipment adds to the customer’s operation as a clue
to subsequent pricing.
Companies must interpret beta test results carefully, because only
a small number of test customers are used, they are not randomly
drawn, and tests are somewhat customized to each site. Another risk
is that testers unimpressed with the product may leak unfavorable
reports about it.
At trade shows the company can observe how much interest buyers show in the new product, how they react to various features and
terms, and how many express purchase intentions or place orders. In
distributor and dealer display rooms, products may stand next to the
manufacturer’s other products and possibly competitors’ products,
yielding preference and pricing information in the product’s normal
selling atmosphere. However, customers who come in might not
represent the target market, or they might want to place early orders
that cannot be filled.

Companies such as General Mills
may avoid test markets to use
limited-scope product launches
instead.

588

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Industrial manufacturers come close to using full test marketing when they give a limited supply of the product to the sales force to sell in a limited number of areas that receive promotion support and printed catalog sheets.

Commercialization
Commercialization incurs the company’s highest costs to date.75 The firm will need to contract for
manufacture or build or rent a full-scale manufacturing facility. To introduce a major new consumer packaged good into the national market can cost $25 million to $100 million in advertising,
promotion, and other communications in the first year. For new food products, marketing expenditures typically represent 57 percent of first-year sales. Most new-product campaigns rely on a
sequenced mix of market communication tools.

WHEN (TIMING) Suppose a company has almost completed the development work on its new
product and learns a competitor is nearing the end of its development work. The company faces
three choices:
1. First entry—The first firm entering a market usually enjoys the “first mover advantages” of
locking up key distributors and customers and gaining leadership. But if rushed to market
before it has been thoroughly debugged, the first entry can backfire.
2. Parallel entry—The firm might time its entry to coincide with the competitor’s entry. The
market may pay more attention when two companies are advertising the new product.76
3. Late entry—The firm might delay its launch until after the competitor has borne the cost of
educating the market, and its product may reveal flaws the late entrant can avoid. The late
entrant can also learn the size of the market.
If a new product replaces an older product, the company might delay until the old product’s
stock is drawn down. If the product is seasonal, it might wait until the season arrives; often a product waits for a “killer application” to occur. Many companies are now encountering competitive
“design-arounds”—rivals are making their own versions just different enough to avoid patent
infringement and royalties.77

WHERE (GEOGRAPHIC STRATEGY) Most companies will develop a planned market
rollout over time. In choosing rollout markets, the major criteria are market potential, the
company’s local reputation, the cost of filling the pipeline, the cost of communication media, the
influence of the area on other areas, and competitive penetration. Small companies select an
attractive city and put on a blitz campaign, entering other cities one at a time. Large companies
introduce their product into a whole region and then move to the next. Companies with national
distribution networks, such as auto companies, launch new models nationally.
With the Web connecting far-flung parts of the globe, competition is more likely to cross national borders. Companies are increasingly rolling out new products simultaneously across the
globe. However, masterminding a global launch poses challenges, and a sequential rollout across
countries may still be the best option.78
TO WHOM (TARGET-MARKET PROSPECTS) Within the rollout markets, the company
must target initial distribution and promotion to the best prospect groups. Ideally they should be
early adopters, heavy users, and opinion leaders it can reach at low cost.79 Few groups include all
these, so the company should rate prospects and target the best group. The aim is to generate strong
sales as soon as possible to attract further prospects.

HOW (INTRODUCTORY MARKET STRATEGY) Because new-product launches often
take longer and cost more than expected, many potentially successful offerings suffer from
underfunding. It’s important to allocate sufficient time and resources—yet not overspend—as the
new product gains traction in the marketplace.80
To coordinate the many tasks in launching a new product, management can use network-planning
techniques such as critical path scheduling (CPS), which develops a master chart showing the
simultaneous and sequential activities that must take place. By estimating how much time each
activity takes, planners estimate completion time for the entire project. Any delay in any activity on
the critical path—the shortest route to completion—will delay the project. If the launch must be
completed sooner, the planner searches for ways to reduce time along the critical path.81

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

| CHAPTER 20

589

The Consumer-Adoption Process
Adoption is an individual’s decision to become a regular user of a product and is followed by the
consumer-loyalty process. New-product marketers typically aim at early adopters and use the theory
of innovation diffusion and consumer adoption to identify them.

Stages in the Adoption Process
An innovation is any good, service, or idea that someone perceives as new, no matter how long its
history. Everett Rogers defines the innovation diffusion process as “the spread of a new idea from
its source of invention or creation to its ultimate users or adopters.”82 The consumer-adoption
process is the mental steps through which an individual passes from first hearing about an innovation to final adoption.83 They are:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Awareness—The consumer becomes aware of the innovation but lacks information about it.
Interest—The consumer is stimulated to seek information about the innovation.
Evaluation—The consumer considers whether to try the innovation.
Trial—The consumer tries the innovation to improve his or her estimate of its value.
Adoption—The consumer decides to make full and regular use of the innovation.

The new-product marketer should facilitate movement through these stages. A water filtration
system manufacturer might discover that many consumers are stuck in the interest stage; they do
not buy because of their uncertainty and the large investment cost.84 But these same consumers
would be willing to use a water filtration system at home on a trial basis for a small monthly fee.
The manufacturer should consider offering a trial-use plan with option to buy.

Factors Influencing the Adoption Process
Marketers recognize the following characteristics of the adoption process: differences in individual
readiness to try new products, the effect of personal influence, differing rates of adoption, and
differences in organizations’ readiness to try new products. Some researchers are focusing on usediffusion processes as a complement to adoption process models, to see how consumers actually
use new products.85

READINESS TO TRY NEW PRODUCTS AND PERSONAL INFLUENCE Everett
Rogers defines a person’s level of innovativeness as “the degree to which an individual is relatively
earlier in adopting new ideas than the other members of his social system.” Some people are the first
to adopt new clothing fashions or new appliances; some doctors are the first to prescribe new
medicines.86 See the adopter categories in
Figure 20.7. After a slow start, an
increasing number of people adopt the innovation, the number reaches a peak, and
then it diminishes as fewer nonadopters remain. The five adopter groups differ in
their value orientations and their motives for adopting or resisting the new product.87
•

•

•

•
•

Innovators are technology enthusiasts; they are venturesome and enjoy tinkering
with new products and mastering their intricacies. In return for low prices, they
are happy to conduct alpha and beta testing and report on early weaknesses.
Early adopters are opinion leaders who carefully search for new technologies
that might give them a dramatic competitive advantage. They are less price sensitive and willing to adopt the product if given personalized solutions and good
service support.
Early majority are deliberate pragmatists who adopt the new technology when
its benefits are proven and a lot of adoption has already taken place. They make
up the mainstream market.
Late majority are skeptical conservatives who are risk averse, technology shy, and
price sensitive.
Laggards are tradition-bound and resist the innovation until the status quo is no
longer defensible.

Each group requires a different type of marketing if the firm wants to move its innovation through the full product life cycle.88

Many innovators and early
adopters were thrilled when Apple
CEO Steve Jobs announced the
launch of the iPad in January
2010.

590

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

|Fig. 20.7|

Adopter
Categorization on the
Basis of Relative Time
of Adoption of
Innovations
Source: Tungsten, http://en.wikipedia.ord/wiki/
Everett_Rogers. Based on Rogers, E. (1962) Diffusion
of Innovations. Free Press, London, NY, USA.

2 12 %
Innovators
1

13 2 %
Early adopters

34%
Early majority

34%
Late majority

16%
Laggards

Time of Adoption of Innovations

Personal influence, the effect one person has on another’s attitude or purchase probability, has
greater significance in some situations and for some individuals than others, and it is more important in
evaluation than the other stages. It has more power over late than early adopters and in risky situations.
Companies often target innovators and early adopters with product rollouts. When Nike
entered the skateboarding market, it recognized an antiestablishment, big-company bias from the
target market could present a sizable challenge. To gain “street cred” with teen skaters, it sold exclusively to independent shops, advertised nowhere but skate magazines, and gained sponsorships
from well-admired pro riders by engaging them in product design.89

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INNOVATION Some products catch on immediately (roller
blades), whereas others take a long time to gain acceptance (diesel engine autos). Five
characteristics influence an innovation’s rate of adoption. We consider them for digital video
recorders (DVRs) for home use, as exemplified by TiVo.90
The first characteristic is relative advantage—the degree to which the innovation appears superior to existing products. The greater the perceived relative advantage of using a DVR, say, for easily
recording favorite shows, pausing live TV, or skipping commercials, the more quickly it will be
adopted. The second is compatibility—the degree to which the innovation matches the values and
experiences of the individuals. DVRs are highly compatible with the preferences of avid television
watchers. Third is complexity—the degree to which the innovation is difficult to understand or use.
DVRs are somewhat complex and will therefore take a slightly longer time to penetrate into home
use. Fourth is divisibility—the degree to which the innovation can be tried on a limited basis. This
provides a sizable challenge for DVRs—sampling can occur only in a retail store or perhaps a friend’s
house. Fifth is communicability—the degree to which the benefits of use are observable or describable to others. The fact that DVRs have some clear advantages can help create interest and curiosity.
Other characteristics that influence the rate of adoption are cost, risk and uncertainty, scientific
credibility, and social approval. The new-product marketer must research all these factors and give
the key ones maximum attention in designing the product and marketing program.91

ORGANIZATIONS’ READINESS TO ADOPT INNOVATIONS The creator of a new
teaching method would want to identify innovative schools. The producer of a new piece of
medical equipment would want to identify innovative hospitals. Adoption is associated with
variables in the organization’s environment (community progressiveness, community income), the
organization itself (size, profits, pressure to change), and the administrators (education level, age,
sophistication). Other forces come into play in trying to get a product adopted into organizations
that receive the bulk of their funding from the government, such as public schools. A controversial
or innovative product can be squelched by negative public opinion.

Summary
1. Once a company has segmented the market, chosen
its target customer groups and identified their needs,
and determined its desired market positioning, it is ready

to develop and launch appropriate new products and
services. Marketing should participate with other departments in every stage of new-product development.

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

2. Successful new-product development requires the company to establish an effective organization for managing
the development process. Companies can choose to
use product managers, new-product managers, newproduct committees, new-product departments, or
new-product venture teams. Increasingly, companies
are adopting cross-functional teams, connecting to
individuals and organizations outside the company, and
developing multiple product concepts.
3. Eight stages take place in the new-product development process: idea generation, screening, concept
development and testing, marketing strategy development, business analysis, product development, market

| CHAPTER 20

591

testing, and commercialization. At each stage, the
company must determine whether the idea should be
dropped or moved to the next stage.
4. The consumer-adoption process is the process by which
customers learn about new products, try them, and
adopt or reject them. Today many marketers are targeting heavy users and early adopters of new products, because both groups can be reached by specific media
and tend to be opinion leaders. The consumer-adoption
process is influenced by many factors beyond the marketer’s control, including consumers’ and organizations’
willingness to try new products, personal influences, and
the characteristics of the new product or innovation.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Whom Should You Target with New
Products?
Some new-products experts maintain that getting close to
customers through intensive research is the only way to develop successful new products. Other experts disagree and
maintain that customers can’t possibly provide useful feedback on what they don’t know and can’t provide insights
that will lead to breakthrough products.
Take a position: Consumer research is critical to newproduct development versus Consumer research may
not be all that helpful in new-product development.

Marketing Excellence

>>Apple
Over
the
past
decade, Apple has
become a world
leader in innovative new product launches. The
company has truly
transformed the
way people listen
to music, play
video games, talk
on the phone,
and even read
books. Apple’s
evolutionary
product innovations include
the iPod, iMac,
iPhone, and iPad

Marketing Discussion
Product Innovativeness
Think about the last new product you bought. How do you
think its success will be affected by the five characteristics
of an innovation: relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, divisibility, and communicability?

and are the reason the company topped Fortune magazine’s World’s Most Admired Companies list three years in
a row, from 2008 to 2010.
One of Apple’s most important innovations over the
past decade was the iPod MP3 player. Not only has the
iPod become a cultural phenomenon; it introduced many
consumers to Apple and initiated a series of monumental
product innovations. The iPod exemplified Apple’s innovative design skills and looked, felt, and operated like no
other device. With the launch of the iTunes Music Store, a
dynamic duo of legally downloadable music and cuttingedge portable music player caused iPod sales to
skyrocket. To the delight of Apple (and the chagrin of
competitor Sony), the iPod has become “the Walkman of
the 21st century.”
Beyond spurring sales, the iPod has been central in
changing the way people listen to and use music.
According to musician John Mayer, “People feel they’re
walking through musicology” when they use their iPods,
leading them to listen to more music, and with more passion. The iPod has gone through a series of generations,
and along the way Apple has added features like photo,
video, and radio capabilities.

592

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Apple reached its impressive market domination
through a combination of shrewd product innovation and
clever marketing. It defined a broad access point for its
target market—music lovers who wanted their music,
whenever and wherever. The marketing effort was
designed to appeal to Mac fans as well as people who
had not used Apple products in the past. This broader access required a shift in Apple’s channel strategies. As a
result, Apple added “mass electronic” retailers such as
Best Buy and (now defunct) Circuit City to its existing
channels, quadrupling its number of outlets.
Besides this enhanced “push” effort, Apple also developed memorable, creative “pull” advertising that helped
drive the popularity of the iPod. The Silhouettes campaign,
featuring people in silhouette listening to iPods and dancing,
appeared all over the world with a message simple enough
to work across cultures, portraying the iPod as cool but not
beyond the reach of anyone who enjoyed music.
As the iPod’s popularity grew, a halo effect helped increase Apple’s market share in its other products. In fact,
in 2007 Apple officially changed its name from Apple
Computer Inc. to Apple Inc. to help communicate the
company’s focus in noncomputer products. By 2009,
iPod sales had topped $8 billion, and by 2010 more than
250 million had been sold worldwide.
Apple’s next-largest product launch after the iPod was
the iPhone, its 2007 entry to the cell phone industry.
With its touch-screen pad, virtual keyboard, and Internet
and e-mail capabilities, the iPhone launched to huge consumer excitement; people lined up for hours to be among
the first to buy one. But investment analysts feared Apple’s
two-year contract with AT&T and high initial price would
hinder the iPhone’s success. Seventy-four days after the
product’s debut, however, Apple had sold its one millionth
iPhone. It had taken the iPod two years to reach the cumulative sales ($1.1 million) the iPhone had reached after its
first quarter. In fact, half the iPods’ buyers switched to AT&T
from a different wireless carrier, incurring fees to break their
contracts, just to have a chance to own an iPhone.
Over the next three years, Apple dropped the price of
the iPhone significantly and added impressive picture and
video capabilities, video game features, a faster processor, and hundreds of thousands of additional applications.
By then, the iPhone had become a game-changing technological invention. Apple took in $13 billion in iPhone
sales worldwide in 2009, and when the iPhone 4

Marketing Excellence

>>Research In Motion
Research in Motion (RIM) is the company behind
BlackBerry, the best-selling smart-phone brand in the

launched in 2010, showcasing Face Time video calling,
Steve Jobs declared it “the most successful product
launch in Apple’s history.”
Also in 2010, a media frenzy helped Apple launch the
iPad, a multitouch device that combines the look and feel
of the iPhone with the power of a MacBook. The slick
handheld device gives consumers access to music,
books, movies, pictures, and work documents at the
touch of a finger without mouse or keyboard. Apple’s
marketing campaign emphasized its appeal: “What is
iPad? iPad is thin. iPad is beautiful. iPad goes anywhere
and lasts all day. There is no right way or wrong way. It’s
crazy powerful. It’s magical. You already know how to use
it. It’s 200,000 apps and counting . . . It’s already a revolution and it’s only just begun.”
With $42 billion in annual revenue, Apple continues to
increase its annual R&D budget each year, spending
$1.3 billion in 2009 alone. The company takes creating,
producing, and launching new products very seriously.
With creative marketing support behind them, these
products are the reason consumers and analysts alike
stay on their toes awaiting Apple’s latest product news.
Questions
1. Apple’s product launches over the past decade have
been monumental. What makes the company so
good at innovation? Is anyone comparable to Apple
in this respect?
2. How important was the iPod to Apple’s current success? Discuss the significance of the iPhone and
iPad launches to Apple’s new product development
strategy.
3. What’s next for Apple? Should it continue to move
away from computers and toward more new handheld devices?
Sources: “World’s Most Admired Companies,” Fortune, 2010; “iPhone4: The ‘Most Successful
Product Launch’ in Apple’s History,” Independent, June 28, 2010; Joseph De Avila, “Why Some
Apple Fans Won’t Buy the iPhone,” Wall Street Journal, September 12, 2007, D.3; Nick
Wingfield, “Apple Businesses Fuel Each Other; Net Jumps as Mac Sales Top PC-Industry Growth
Rate; iPhones, iPods Also Thrive,” Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2007; Terril Yue Jones, “How
Long Can the iPod Stay on Top?” Los Angeles Times, March 5, 2006; Beth Snyder Bulik, “Grab
an Apple and a Bag of Chips,” Advertising Age, May 23, 2005; Jay Parsons, “A Is for Apple on
iPod,” Dallas Morning News, October 6, 2005; Peter Burrows, “Rock On, iPod,” BusinessWeek,
June 7, 2004, pp. 130–31; Jay Lyman, “Mini iPod Moving Quickly, Apple Says,” TechNewsWorld,
February 26, 2004; Steven Levy, “iPod Nation,” Newsweek, July 25, 2004; “Apple Computer:
iPod Silhouettes,” New York Marketing Association; Steven Levy, “iPod Nation,” Newsweek, July
25, 2004; Apple, www.apple.com; Effie Worldwide, www.effie.org.

United States. RIM went public in 1997 and introduced the
first BlackBerry two years later—a bulky corporate paging
device that ran off an AA battery to read e-mail. Today, the
company is credited with launching the handheld smartphone craze and the obsession with 24/7/365 access to
e-mail and the Internet. BlackBerry eventually earned the

INTRODUCING NEW MARKET OFFERINGS

appropriate
nickname, “CrackBerry,” as consumers became addicted to their latest technological gadget.
The obsession started with RIM founder Mike Lazaridis,
who used to collect business cards from bankers on Wall
Street and send college kids to their offices to set them up
with the first BlackBerry devices. “It was a puppy dog sale,”
Lazaridis says. “‘Take a puppy dog home, and if you don’t
like it, bring it back.’ They never come back.” Within a few
years the BlackBerry had become a Wall Street staple, and
after September 11, 2001, it gained nationwide attention
as a critical security and communications device for the
government.
RIM continued to launch new generations of BlackBerry
products that focused on high-security capabilities and
essential business features, including an organizer, calendar,
pager, longer-lasting battery, and improved wireless Internet
access. The firm focused its push strategy on building the
BlackBerry brand as the most secure, reliable, and efficient
data device solution on the market.
It took five years, but in 2003 RIM sold its one
millionth BlackBerry. Only one year later it sold its two
millionth device, and the BlackBerry’s growth exploded.
In 2005, PCWorld named the BlackBerry 850 the 14th
greatest gadget of the past 50 years, and between 2006
and 2008, Fortune dubbed RIM the fastest-growing
company in the world.
Several factors led to RIM’s explosive growth during
the mid-2000s. First, it was the innovation leader at the
time. The BlackBerry changed the way people communicated, worked, and lived. And unlike competitors, RIM offered an end-to-end solution; it developed and produced
the hardware as well as the software and services that
made BlackBerry work.
As RIM expanded, it made the strategic decision to
partner with numerous carriers around the globe instead of
just one. This conferred two advantages. First, consumers

| CHAPTER 20

593

could easily purchase a BlackBerry device no matter what
their carrier or geographical location was and not worry
about breaking an existing carrier contract. Secondly, RIM
started producing unique products for its different carriers
and their audiences. It also licensed its architecture to
third-party devices, making BlackBerry wireless solutions
available to other companies. All these decisions increased revenue and subscribers around the world.
In terms of marketing, RIM successfully targeted its
initial efforts at the business community, branding the
BlackBerry smart phone a workforce “must have” and focusing its product and software innovations on meeting
the needs of businesses. It continues to serve this market
today, with solutions like its BlackBerry Enterprise Server
for small and medium-sized businesses.
Finally, BlackBerry rode the coattails of the iPhone
launch in 2007. Apple’s iPhone sparked interest in many
consumers—telling them smart phones were not just for the
business community—and as a result, many consumers
tried out a BlackBerry for the first time. In 2008, RIM
launched its first mass advertising campaign targeting consumers, and new subscriber sales skyrocketed. Perhaps
BlackBerry’s biggest salesperson was President Obama,
who could be seen carrying and checking his BlackBerry
throughout the election year. Instantly, the BlackBerry became “cool” in the eyes of younger consumers.
Today, BlackBerry continues to compete in the smartphone category, adding more consumers than business
customers each year. Recent product launches have
added video, photo, and music capabilities, touch-screen
pads, and instant messaging—features that attract
tweens and young adults. RIM had $15 billion in sales
during fiscal 2010, sold 37 million smart phones in 2010
alone, and now has over 41 million users in 175 countries.
While competition has increased tremendously and remains stiff, the company’s focus on generating new products and solutions is clear. Lazaridis explained, “There is
great depth and breadth to what we do. It’s more than just
the BlackBerry. We develop silicon, operating systems, industrial design; we manufacture. We run our own network. RIM is an industry unto itself.”
Questions
1. Evaluate Research In Motion’s keys to success. What
did the company do well and, in hindsight, what
should it have done differently during its decade of
extreme growth?
2. Is Research In Motion still a leader in innovation? Why
or why not? What’s next for the company?
Sources: Jessi Hempel, “Smartphone Wars—BlackBerry’s Plan to Win,” Fortune, August 17,
2009; Saul Hansell and Ian Austen, “BlackBerry, Upgraded, Aims to Suit Every User,” New York
Times, October 13, 2009; Michael Comeau, “Can Research In Motion’s BlackBerry Regain
Market Share?” Minyanville, July 12, 2010; “The World Masters of Innovation,” BusinessWeek;
Research In Motion, Annual Reports; RIM, www.rim.com.

594

PART 8

r
e
t
ap
h
C

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

21

In This Chapter, We Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What factors should a company review before deciding to go abroad?
2. How can companies evaluate and select specific foreign markets to
enter?
3. What are the differences between marketing in a developing and a
developed market?
4. What are the major ways of entering a foreign market?
5. To what extent must the company adapt its products and marketing
program to each foreign country?
6. How do marketers influence country-of-origin effects?
7. How should the company manage and organize its international
activities?

India’s Tata Group has a wide range of
global businesses, including one that
produces the remarkably priced $2,500
Tata Nano or the “People’s Car.”

Tapping into Global Markets
With ever faster communication, transportation, and financial flows, the
world is rapidly shrinking. Countries are increasingly multicultural, and products and services developed in one country are finding enthusiastic acceptance in others. A German businessman
may wear an Italian suit to meet an English friend at a Japanese restaurant, who later returns
home to drink Russian vodka and watch a U.S. movie on a Korean TV. Emerging markets that embrace capitalism and consumerism are especially attractive targets. They are also creating marketing powerhouses all their own.1

Tata Group, India’s biggest conglomerate, operates successful businesses that range
from software, cars, and steel to phone service, tea bags, and wristwatches. Its business dealings stretch far and wide and have included purchases of South Korea’s
Daewoo Motors truck unit, Dutch-British steel giant Corus Group, and UK-based Tetley
Tea. The proprietor of the Taj luxury hotels, Tata also owns or manages the rebranded
Ritz-Carlton in Boston, the Pierre in New York City, and Camden Place in San Francisco. Tata
Consultancy Services, India’s largest tech-services company, collects roughly half its revenues in
North America. Tata is also India’s largest commercial vehicle maker and created a stir with the recent
launch of its $2,500 Tata Nano, dubbed the “People’s Car.” Although impossibly low-priced by
Western standards, at one Indian lakh the Nano’s price is three times higher than India’s annual per
capita income. Looking somewhat like an egg on wheels, the Nano comfortably seats five while running a 33-horsepower engine that gets nearly 50 miles per gallon.
Aiming to sell 250,000 units annually, Tata is targeting the 7 million Companies need to be able to cross boundaries within
Indians who buy scooters and motorcycles every year, in part because and outside their country. Although opportunities to enter
they cannot afford a car. The market potential is huge—there are just and compete in international markets are significant, the risks can
seven automobiles per 1,000 people in India. Tata is also targeting also be high. Companies selling in global industries, however, have
other “bottom of the pyramid” markets such as Africa and Southeast no choice but to internationalize their operations. In this chapter,
we review the major decisions in expanding into global markets.
Asia and perhaps even parts of Eastern Europe and Latin America.

Competing on a Global Basis
Many companies have been global marketers for decades—firms like Shell, Bayer, and Toshiba have
sold goods around the world for years. In luxury goods such as jewelry, watches, and handbags,
where the addressable market is relatively small, a global profile is essential for firms like Prada,
Gucci, and Louis Vuitton to profitably grow. But global competition is intensifying in more product
categories as new firms make their mark on the international stage.2
The automotive market is becoming a worldwide free-for-all. In Chile, with no domestic auto
manufacturers, imports are coming from all over the world, including 14 different brands of
Chinese cars, trucks, and commercial vehicles.3 In China’s fast-moving mobile-phone market,
Motorola found its market share cut in half over a two-year period from inroads by Nokia and
Asian competitors.
Competition from developing-market firms is also heating up. Mahindra Motors’ four-door,
diesel-powered short-bed trucks from India are tackling Europe, Asia, and the United States, promising superior fuel economy.4 Founded in Guatemala, Pollo Campero (Spanish for “country
595

596

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Latin America’s fried chicken
favorite, Pollo Campero, has
entered the U.S. market in part by
targeting areas populated by
Hispanic immigrants.

chicken’) has used Latin American immigrants to launch over 50 U.S. stores, blending old favorites
such as fried plantains and milky horchata drinks with traditional U.S. fare such as grilled chicken
and mashed potatoes.5
Although some U.S. businesses may want to eliminate foreign competition through protective
legislation, the better way to compete is to continuously improve products at home and expand
into foreign markets. In a global industry, competitors’ strategic positions in major geographic or
national markets are affected by their overall global positions.6 A global firm operates in more than
one country and captures R&D, production, logistical, marketing, and financial advantages not
available to purely domestic competitors.
Global firms plan, operate, and coordinate their activities on a worldwide basis. Otis Elevator
uses door systems from France, small geared parts from Spain, electronics from Germany, and motor drives from Japan; systems integration happens in the United States. Consider the international
success of Hyundai.7

Hyundai

Hyundai

Once synonymous with cheap and unreliable cars, Hyundai Motor Company
has experienced a massive global transformation. In 1999, its new chairman, Mong-Koo Chung,
declared that Hyundai would no longer focus on volume and market share but on quality instead.
A number of changes were instituted: Hyundai began to benchmark industry leader Toyota,
adopted Six Sigma processes, organized product development cross-functionally, partnered
more closely with suppliers, and increased quality oversight meetings. From a place near the bottom of J.D.
Power’s study of U.S. new vehicle quality in 2001—32nd out of 37 brands—Hyundai zoomed to number four
by 2009, surpassed only by luxury brands Lexus, Porsche, and Cadillac. Hyundai also transformed its marketing. Its “Assurance” campaign, backed by a pricey Super Bowl ad, allowed new buyers to return their cars
risk-free if they lost their jobs. Other programs guaranteed customers low gas prices for a year and tax credits in advance of the government’s “Cash for Clunkers” program. The U.S. market was not the only one
receiving attention from Hyundai and its younger, more affordably priced brand sibling, Kia. Hyundai is the
second-largest car-maker in India, it is supplying Europe with a new €1 billion factory in the Czech Republic,
and a joint venture with Beijing Automotive is targeting China.
Many successful global U.S. brands have tapped into universal consumer values and needs—
such as Nike with athletic performance, MTV with youth culture, and Coca-Cola with youthful
optimism. These firms hire thousands of employees abroad and make sure their products and
marketing activities are consistent with local sensibilities.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

Global marketing extends beyond products. Services represent the fastest-growing sector of the
global economy and account for two-thirds of global output, one-third of global employment, and
nearly 20 percent of global trade. Although some countries have erected entry barriers or regulations, the World Trade Organization, consisting of 150 countries, continues to press for more free
trade in international services and other areas.8
For a company of any size or any type to go global, it must make a series of decisions (see
Figure 21.1). We’ll examine each of these decisions here.9

| CHAPTER 21

Deciding whether
to go abroad

Deciding which
markets to
enter

Deciding Whether to Go Abroad
Most companies would prefer to remain domestic if their domestic market were large enough.
Managers would not need to learn other languages and laws, deal with volatile currencies, face
political and legal uncertainties, or redesign their products to suit different customer needs and
expectations. Business would be easier and safer. Yet several factors can draw companies into the
international arena:

Deciding how
to enter the
market

•
•
•
•
•

Some international markets present better profit opportunities than the domestic market.
The company needs a larger customer base to achieve economies of scale.
The company wants to reduce its dependence on any one market.
The company decides to counterattack global competitors in their home markets.
Customers are going abroad and require international service.

Deciding on
the marketing
program

Reflecting the power of these forces, exports accounted for roughly 13 percent of U.S. GDP in
2008, almost double the figure 40 years ago.10 Before making a decision to go abroad, the company
must also weigh several risks:

Deciding on
the marketing
organization

•
•
•
•
•

The company might not understand foreign preferences and could fail to offer a competitively
attractive product.
The company might not understand the foreign country’s business culture.
The company might underestimate foreign regulations and incur unexpected costs.
The company might lack managers with international experience.
The foreign country might change its commercial laws, devalue its currency, or undergo a
political revolution and expropriate foreign property.

Some companies don’t act until events thrust them into the international arena. The
internationalization process typically has four stages:11
1.
2.
3.
4.

No regular export activities
Export via independent representatives (agents)
Establishment of one or more sales subsidiaries
Establishment of production facilities abroad

The first task is to move from stage 1 to stage 2. Most firms work with an independent agent and
enter a nearby or similar country. Later, the firm establishes an export department to manage its
agent relationships. Still later, it replaces agents with its own sales subsidiaries in its larger export
markets. This increases investment and risk, but also earning potential. Next, to manage subsidiaries, the company replaces the export department with an international department or division. If markets are large and stable, or the host country requires local production, the company
will locate production facilities there.
By this time, it’s operating as a multinational and optimizing its sourcing, financing, manufacturing,
and marketing as a global organization. According to some researchers, top management begins to focus
on global opportunities when more than 15 percent of revenue comes from international markets.12

Deciding Which Markets to Enter
In deciding to go abroad, the company needs to define its marketing objectives and policies. What
proportion of international to total sales will it seek? Most companies start small when they venture
abroad. Some plan to stay small; others have bigger plans.

|Fig. 21.1|

Major Decisions in
International
Marketing

597

598

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

How Many Markets to Enter
The company must decide how many countries to enter and how fast to expand. Typical entry
strategies are the waterfall approach, gradually entering countries in sequence, and the sprinkler
approach, entering many countries simultaneously. Increasingly, firms—especially technologyintensive firms—are born global and market to the entire world from the outset.13
Matsushita, BMW, General Electric, Benetton, and The Body Shop followed the waterfall
approach. It allows firms to carefully plan expansion and is less likely to strain human and financial
resources. When first-mover advantage is crucial and a high degree of competitive intensity
prevails, the sprinkler approach is better. Microsoft sold over 150 million copies of Windows 7 in
100 countries in fall 2009 with only minor tweaks in its marketing. The main risk is the substantial
resources needed and the difficulty of planning entry strategies for many diverse markets.14
The company must also choose the countries to consider based on the product and on geography,
income and population, and political climate.

Developed versus Developing Markets
One of the sharpest distinctions in global marketing is between developed and developing or
emerging markets such as Brazil, Russia, India, and China (often called “BRIC” for short: Brazil,
Russia, India, and China).15 Two other developing markets with much economic and marketing significance are Indonesia and South Africa. The unmet needs of the developing world represent huge
potential markets for food, clothing, shelter, consumer electronics, appliances, and many other
goods. Market leaders rely on developing markets to fuel their growth. Consider the following:
•

•
•

Coca-Cola, Unilever, Colgate-Palmolive, Groupe Danone, and PepsiCo earn 5 percent to 15 percent
of their total revenues from the three largest emerging markets in Asia—China, India, and
Indonesia.16
Developing markets make up over 25 percent of Kraft’s total business, almost 40 percent of
Cadbury’s, and over 50 percent of Tupperware’s sales.17
Nestlé estimates about 1 billion consumers in emerging markets will increase their incomes
enough to afford its products within the next decade. The world’s largest food company gets
about a third of its revenue from emerging economies and aims to lift that to 45 percent
within a decade.18

Developed nations account for about 20 percent of the world’s population. Can marketers serve
the other 80 percent, which has much less purchasing power and living conditions ranging from
mild deprivation to severe deficiency? This imbalance is likely to get worse, as more than 90 percent
of future population growth is projected to occur in the less developed countries.19
Successfully entering developing markets requires a special set of skills and plans. Consider how
these companies pioneered ways to serve “invisible” consumers:20
Microsoft launched Windows 7
with a massive global campaign.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

•
•
•

| CHAPTER 21

599

Grameenphone marketed cell phones to 35,000 villages in Bangladesh by hiring village
women as agents who leased phone time to other villagers, one call at a time.
Colgate-Palmolive rolled into Indian villages with video vans that showed the benefits of
toothbrushing.
Corporación GEO builds low-income housing in Mexico. The two-bedroom homes are modular and expandable.

These marketers capitalized on the potential of developing markets by changing their conventional marketing practices.21 Selling in developing areas can’t be “business as usual.” Economic and
cultural differences abound, a marketing infrastructure may barely exist, and local competition can
be surprisingly stiff.22

Local Dynamos

An extensive study by the Boston Consulting Group identifies 50 firms in 10 emerging economies as “local dynamos.” According to BCG, a local
dynamo is (1) prospering in its home market, (2) fending off multinational rivals, and (3) not
focused on expanding abroad. India’s Amul farmers’ cooperative sells dairy products through
a network of 2.8 million members supported by one of the longest-running and best-loved ad
campaigns in India. Its ice-cream and chocolate milk businesses have survived the entry of Unilever and
Nestlé, respectively. Brazilian budget airline Gol has targeted thrifty Brazilian consumers willing to sacrifice
convenience for price; planes often depart at odd hours and make multiple stops. In Mexico, retailer Grupo Elektra [a Mexican financial and retail
corporation owned by Grupo Salinas that is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange (EKT), the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores (ELEKTRA), and the
Spanish Stock Market Latibex (XEKT)] is selling washing machines, refrigerators, televisions, and other items on credit to people making less than
$10 a day. The company’s many stores double as bank branches where
people can withdraw, deposit, and transmit cash, as well as get loans.
According to BCG, local dynamos often combine in-depth understanding
of consumer tastes with cost-effective production techniques to create a
locally laser-focused business model.23
Getting the marketing equation right in developing markets can
pay big dividends:
•

•

•

•

Smaller packaging and lower sales prices are often critical when
incomes and housing spaces are limited. Unilever’s 4-cent sachets of detergent and shampoo
were a big hit in rural India, where 70 percent of the population still lives.24
Eighty percent of consumers in emerging markets buy their products from tiny bodegas, stalls,
kiosks, and mom-and-pop stores not much bigger than a closet, which Procter & Gamble calls
“high-frequency stores.” In India, 98 percent of food is still purchased from the 12 million
neighborhood mom-and-pop outfits called kirana stores.25
Nokia sends marketing, sales, and engineering staff from its entry-level phone group to spend
a week in people’s homes in rural China, Thailand, and Kenya to observe how they use phones.
By developing rock-bottom-priced phones with just the right functionality, Nokia has become
the market-share leader in Africa and Asia.26
A Western image can be helpful. Coca-Cola’s success against local cola brand Jianlibao in
China was partly due to its symbolic values of modernity and affluence.27

Competition is also growing from companies based in developing markets. China has been exporting cars to Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East. Tata of India, Cemex of Mexico, and
Petronas of Malaysia have emerged from developing markets to become strong multinationals selling in many countries.28
Many firms are using lessons gleaned from marketing in developing markets to better compete
in their developed markets (recall the “bottom of the pyramid” discussion from Chapter 3). John
Deere’s research facility in Pune, India, developed four no-frills tractors whose affordability and

Grupo Elektra’s retail stores in
Mexico and Latin America sell
appliances and offer financial
services to low-income consumers.

600

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

maneuverability also found a market in the United States and elsewhere. About half the tractors
Deere makes in India are sold overseas.29
Product innovation has become a two-way street between developing and developed markets.
The challenge is to think creatively about how marketing can fulfill the dreams of most of the
world’s population for a better standard of living.30 Many companies are betting they can do that.
“Marketing Insight: Spotlight on Key Developing Markets” highlights some important developments in the BRIC countries plus South Africa and Indonesia.

Marketing Insight
Spotlight on Key
Developing Markets
Brazil

According to the World Bank, 25 percent of Latin Americans live on
less than $2 a day; millions more earn only a few hundred dollars a
month. In Brazil, the region’s biggest market, low-income groups
make up 87 percent of the population but earn only 53 percent of the
income. Marketers are finding innovative ways to sell products and
services to these poor and low-income residents. Nestlé Brazil
boosted sales of Bono cookies 40 percent after shrinking the package
from 200 to 140 grams and lowering the price. With illiteracy
widespread, Unilever launched a brand of soap in northeast Brazil with
the simple name, “Ala.”
Brazil experienced some “go-go” growth years in the 1960s and
1970s, when it was the world’s second-fastest-growing large economy.
As a result, it now boasts large and well-developed agricultural, mining,
manufacturing, and service sectors. Brazilian firms that have succeeded
internationally include aircraft manufacturer Embraer, sandal maker
Havaianas, and brewer and beverage producer AmBev, which merged
with Interbrew to form InBev. It also differs from other emerging markets
in being a full-blown democracy, unlike Russia and China, and it has no
serious disputes with neighbors, unlike India.
A number of obstacles exist, however, that are popularly called
custo Brasil (“the cost of Brazil”). The cost of transporting products eats
up nearly 13 percent of Brazil’s GDP, five percentage points more than in
the United States. Unloading a container is twice as expensive as in
India and takes three times longer than in China. Most observers see
Brazil’s economic, social, and political transformation as a work in
process, although it emerged from the recent economic recession relatively unscathed.
Russia

The 1991 splintering of the Soviet Union transformed Russia’s isolated,
centrally planned economy to a globally integrated, market-based economy. Russia is the largest exporter of natural gas, the second-largest

exporter of oil, and the third-largest exporter of steel and primary
aluminum. Reliance on commodities has its downside, however.
Russia’s economy was hammered in the recent recession by plunging
commodity prices and the credit crunch.
Dutch brewer Heineken, Swedish retailer IKEA, U.S. banker
Citibank, and more than a dozen carmakers recently ramped up operations in Russia to target its growing middle class, now one-quarter to
one-third of the population with fast-rising salaries and access to consumer credit. But the average Russian still earns only $700 a month, a
fraction of the U.S. average, and many feel left behind. The economic
crisis also saw a significant reduction in foreign investment in the
country.
Russia has a dwindling workforce and poor infrastructure. The
Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development (OECD) cautions
that economic reforms have stagnated and ranks Russia as one of the
most corrupt countries in the world. Many feel Vladimir Putin’s government has been unpredictable and difficult to work with.
Still, companies remain optimistic. In 2006, more than 167,000
Motorola handsets were seized on arrival at Moscow airport. The interior
ministry supposedly destroyed around 50,000 as smuggled or counterfeit, though some were later reported found on the black market.
Eventually most were returned, but more telling was Motorola’s reaction. With Russia as its third-biggest handset market in the world at the
time, an unshaken Motorola stayed the course.
India

Reforms in the early 1990s that lowered trade barriers and liberalized
capital markets have brought India booming investment and consumption. But it’s not all about demand. With many low-cost, high-IQ,
English-speaking employees, India is gaining programming and call
center jobs once held by U.S. workers. Its growth has been driven
largely by the manufacturing and service sectors where most of its
workers reside.
India’s ascent opens a larger market for U.S. and Western goods.
Almost two-thirds of the population is under 35, and about 16 million, or
3 percent, are high-earning targets of youth lifestyle brands connoting
status and affluence. Luxury cars and shiny motorbikes are the most
sought-after status symbols, followed by clothing, food, entertainment,
consumer durables, and travel.
India still struggles with poor infrastructure and public services—
education, health, and water supply—and restrictive labor laws. Its
28 separate states each have their own policies and tax rules. But global
firms such as Mittal, Reliance, Tata, Wipro, and Infosys all have achieved
international success, and many outside firms are setting their sights
there.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

China

China’s 1.3 billion people have marketers scrambling to gain a foothold,
and competition has heated up between domestic and international
firms. Its 2001 entry into the World Trade Organization eased China’s
manufacturing and investment rules and modernized retail and logistics
industries. Greater competition in pricing, products, and channels resulted, but publishing, telecommunications, oil exploration, marketing,
pharmaceuticals, banking, and insurance remained fiercely protected or
off-limits to foreigners altogether. Foreign businesses complain about
subsidized competition, restricted access, conflicting regulations, lack of
protection for intellectual property, and opaque and seemingly arbitrary
bureaucracy.
Selling in China means going beyond the big cities to the 700 million
potential consumers who live in small communities in the rural interior.
About half of potential PC buyers live outside major cities; only one-third
of overall retail revenues come from China’s 24 largest cities. Rural
consumers can be challenging; they have lower incomes, are less
sophisticated, and often cling to local habits. PC maker Lenovo, mobilephone provider TCL, and appliance manufacturer Haier have thrived
despite strong foreign competition. Besides their sharp grasp of Chinese
tastes, they have vast distribution networks, especially in rural areas.
China’s emerging urban middle class is active and discerning, demanding higher-quality products and variety. Although they number four
times the U.S. population, Chinese consumers spend a fraction of what
U.S. consumers spend. Luxury cars are the fastest-growing auto segment thanks to China’s swelling ranks of millionaires.
Indonesia

Indonesia’s reputation as a country historically struggling with natural
disasters, terrorism, and economic uncertainty is quickly being replaced
by a country characterized by political stability and economic growth.
The fourth largest country in the world and the largest Muslim country,
given all its progress, it is perhaps no surprise that Morgan Stanley suggested adding Indonesia to the four BRIC countries to make it the BRICI
countries.
Indonesia has become the third fastest-growing economy in the
region—behind India and China—largely on the basis of its 240 million
consumers. Foreign direct investments account for only 25 percent of
gross domestic product. Although half the population live on less than
$2 a day, their spending and those of an active younger population is
driving economic growth.
Some foreign firms are taking advantage of opportunities there.
Indonesia is one of Reach In Motion’s (RIM’s) hottest markets, and the
BlackBerry has achieved iconic status in the country. RIM has taken advantage of a mobile-friendly environment (broadband service is patchy
and expensive) and has also customized its offerings with dozens of applications designed specifically for the Indonesian market. Its success is
not without some downside though—it has inspired scores of knockoffs
from China dubbed “Chinaberries” by locals.
Indonesia presents other challenges. An archipelago with more
than 14,000 islands in a hot and humid climate, effective, efficient distribution is critical. Large importers have established extensive distribution networks which allow them to extend beyond the one-third of the
population that lives in the six or seven largest cities. Like many developing countries, infrastructure can be lacking.

| CHAPTER 21

601

But the progress of Indonesia in recent years is noteworthy. As further proof, with over 20 percent of the Indonesian Internet users having
a Twitter account, Indonesia is the sixth most active country on the
micro-blogging site.
South Africa

Although South Africa is a developed market, it is included here in its
role as an access point to the African region as well as an important
market in its own right. According to the World Bank, of the 35 least
business-friendly countries, 27 are in sub-Saharan Africa; 42 percent of
the region’s economy is informal. Bad roads, unreliable electricity, and
volatile currency fluctuations add logistical and financial challenges.
War, famine, AIDS, and disaster are even more significant human difficulties. Most Africans live in poverty; 60 percent still engage in agriculture for their primary income.
But a recent period of relative stability has coincided with improvements in health, education, and social services. The 2010 World Cup offered a chance to reexamine economic progress in South Africa and
other African countries. Many international companies are using South
Africa as a launch pad.
•
Mobile phone operator Celtel invested in rural services by introducing the Me2U service, by which callers could send airtime credit to
other mobile phones. Because most Africans don’t have bank accounts, it became a convenient and cheap way to transfer money,
even substituting for cash in some villages.
•
South Africa’s MTN, the region’s largest mobile phone company,
built its own microwave transmission backbone and power supplies in Nigeria, and the first solar pay phone in Lake Victoria,
Uganda.
•
South Africa’s Net1 has built a customer base of 3.6 million accounts by issuing free smart cards to indigent people who lack
bank accounts or credit cards, taking tiny percentages of their
transactions for revenue.
The payoff for companies willing to do business in Africa is often
large margins and minimal competition. SABMiller, the world’s secondlargest brewer, enjoys its best operating margins in Africa. Finding a local partner can add expertise and contacts. SABMiller’s African operations are joint ventures with locals, some of them government. The
Boston Consulting Group has dubbed eight of Africa’s strongest
economies the “African Lions”: Algeria, Botswana, Egypt, Libya,
Mauritius, Morocco, South Africa, and Tunisia.
Sources: Brazil: Antonio Regalado, “Marketers Pursue the Shallow Pocketed,”
Wall Street Journal, January 26, 2007; “Land of Promise,” Economist, April 12,
2007; Melissa Campanelli, “Marketing to Latin America? Think Brazil,” DMNews,
June 20, 2006. Russia: Jason Bush, “Russia Economy Turns Swiftly Siberian,”
BusinessWeek, December 15, 2008, p.68; “Risk and Reward in Russia,”
BusinessWeek Emerging Market Report, October 20, 2008; “Dancing with the Bear,”
Economist, February 3, 2007, pp. 63–64; Jason Bush, “Russia: How Long Can the
Fun Last?” BusinessWeek, December 18, 2006, pp. 50–51; Steven Lee Myers,
“Business as Usual, Russian-Style,” International Herald Tribune, June 13, 2006.
India: Nandan Nilekani, Imagining India: The Idea of a Renewed Nation (New York:
Penguin Press, 2009); Anil K. Gupta and Haiyan Wang, “Five Myths about India,”
Economic Times, December 29, 2009; “India on Fire,” Economist, February 3, 2007,
pp. 69–71; “16m. Young High-Earning Consumers Are Targets of High-End Lifestyle
Products,” News India Times, August 4, 2006, p. 16. China: Edward Wong, “China’s
Export Economy Begins Turning Inward, New York Times, June 24, 2010; Arthur
Kroeber, “Five Myths about the Chinese Economy, Washington Post, April 11, 2010;
“Impenetrable: Selling Foreign Goods in China,” Economist, October 17, 2009;

602

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Dexter Roberts, “Cadillac Floors It in China,” BusinessWeek, June 4, 2007, p. 52;
Bruce Einhorn, “Grudge Match in China,” BusinessWeek, April 2, 2007, pp. 42–43;
Russell Flannery, “Watch Your Back,” Forbes, April 23, 2007, pp. 104–5; Dexter
Roberts, “Cautious Consumers,” BusinessWeek, April 30, 2007, pp. 32–34; Seung
Ho Park and Wilfried R. Vanhonacker, “The Challenge for Multinational Corporations
in China: Think Local, Act Global,” MIT Sloan Management Review (May 31, 2007);
Dexter Roberts, “Scrambling to Bring Crest to the Masses,” BusinessWeek, June 25,
2007, pp. 72–73. Indonesia: Louise Lavabre, “Talking with Our Thumbs: Twitter in
Indonesia,” Jakarta Post, September 22, 2010; Alexandra A. Seno, “Gung-ho

Attitude Delivers Success in Indonesia,” Globe and Mail, March 25, 2010; Mark
MacKinnon, “RIM’s Indonesian Bonanza,” Globe and Mail, March 24, 2010; Peter
Geiling, “Will Indonesia Make It BRICI?” GlobalPost, July 7, 2009; Margie Bauer,
Indonesia—An Economic Success Story,” www.fas.usda.gov, October 14, 2004.
South Africa: “The Price of Freedom: A Special Report on South Africa,” Economist,
June 5, 2010; “Africa’s Dynamo,” BusinessWeek Emerging Market Report,
December 15, 2008; Frank Aquilla, “Africa’s Biggest Score: A Thriving Economy,”
BusinessWeek, June 28, 2010; Helen Coster, “Great Expectations,” Forbes,
February 12, 2007, pp. 56–58; All: CIA World Factbook, www.cia.gov.

Regional economic integration—the creation of trading agreements between blocs of countries—
has intensified in recent years. This means companies are more likely to enter entire regions at the
same time. Certain countries have formed free trade zones or economic communities—groups
of nations organized to work toward common goals in the regulation of international trade (see
Table 21.1).

Evaluating Potential Markets
However much nations and regions integrate their trading policies and standards, each still has
unique features. Its readiness for different products and services, and its attractiveness as a market,
depend on its demographic, economic, sociocultural, natural, technological, and political-legal
environments.
How does a company choose among potential markets to enter? Many prefer to sell to neighboring countries because they understand them better and can control their entry costs more effectively. It’s not surprising that the two largest U.S. export markets are Canada and Mexico, or that
Swedish companies first sold to their Scandinavian neighbors.
At other times, psychic proximity determines choices. Given more familiar language, laws, and
culture, many U.S. firms prefer to sell in Canada, England, and Australia rather than in larger
markets such as Germany and France. Companies should be careful, however, in choosing markets
according to cultural distance. Besides overlooking potentially better markets, they may only superficially analyze real differences that put them at a disadvantage.31

TABLE 21.1

Regional Trade Areas and Agreements

The European Union Formed in 1957, the European Union set out to create a single European market by reducing barriers to the free flow of
products, services, finances, and labor among member countries, and by developing trade policies with nonmember nations. Today, it’s one of
the world’s largest single markets, with 27 member countries, a common currency—the euro—and more than 495 million consumers,
accounting for 37 percent of the world’s exports. Still, companies marketing in Europe face 23 different languages, 2,000 years of historical and
cultural differences, and a daunting mass of local rules.
NAFTA In January 1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) unified the United States, Mexico, and Canada in a single market of
440 million people who produce and consume $16 trillion worth of goods and services annually. Implemented over a 15-year period, NAFTA
eliminates all trade barriers and investment restrictions among the three countries. Before NAFTA, tariffs on U.S. products entering Mexico
averaged 13 percent, whereas U.S. tariffs on Mexican goods averaged 6 percent.
MERCOSUR MERCOSUR (or MERCOSUL) links Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and (soon) Venezuela to promote free trade and the fluid
movement of goods, people, and currency. These five countries have 270 million citizens and collective GDP of $2.4 trillion. Bolivia, Chile,
Columbia, Ecuador, and Peru are associate members and do not enjoy full voting rights or access to all the same markets. NAFTA will likely
eventually merge with this and other arrangements to form an all-Americas free trade zone.
APEC Twenty-one countries, as well as the NAFTA members and Japan and China, are working to create a pan-Pacific free trade area under the
auspices of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. These countries account for approximately 40.5 percent of the world’s
population, approximately 54.2 percent of world GDP, and about 43.7 percent of world trade. Heads of government of APEC members meet at
an annual summit to discuss regional economy, cooperation, trade, and investment.
ASEAN Ten countries make up the Association of Southeast Asian Nations: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Viet Nam. The region is an attractive market of over 590 million people with $1.2 trillion in GDP.
Member countries aim to enhance the area as a major production and export center.
Sources: www.europa.eu; “World Trade Report 2009,” www.wto.org; www.naftanow.org; Council on Foreign Relations, “Mercosur: South America’s Fractious Trade Bloc,” www.cfr.org; www.apec.org;
www.asean.org.

| CHAPTER 21

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

603

Busy ports, such as in Buenos
Aires, Argentina, are fueling the demand for greater trade cooperation.

It often makes sense to operate in fewer countries, with a deeper commitment and penetration
in each. In general, a company prefers to enter countries that have high market attractiveness and
low market risk, and in which it possesses a competitive advantage. Consider how these firms have
assessed market opportunities:

•

•

Coke and Suntory are looking for energy-drink distribution opportunities outside saturated
North America where Red Bull and Monster rule, focusing on less competitive markets in
Western Europe and Asia. Both companies are considering using their extensive distribution
networks to sell brands whose rights they have acquired, Monster and V, respectively.32
Jamaica-based Digicel has conquered politically unstable developing countries such as Papua
New Guinea, Haiti, and Tonga with products appealing to poor and typically overlooked consumers, whose fierce loyalty helps protect Digicel from aggressive government interventions.33
Bechtel Corporation, the construction giant, does a cost-benefit analysis of overseas markets,
factoring in the position of competitors, infrastructure, regulatory and trade barriers, and corporate and individual taxes. It looks for untapped needs for its products or services, a skilled
labor pool, and a welcoming environment (governmental and physical).34

Deciding How to Enter the Market
Once a company decides to target a particular country, it must determine the best mode of entry.
Its broad choices are indirect exporting, direct exporting, licensing, joint ventures, and direct investment, shown in
Figure 21.2. Each succeeding strategy entails more commitment, risk, control,
and profit potential.

Indirect and Direct Export
Companies typically start with export, specifically indirect exporting—that is, they work through independent intermediaries. Domestic-based export merchants buy the manufacturer’s products and
then sell them abroad. Domestic-based export agents, including trading companies, seek and negotiate
foreign purchases for a commission. Cooperative organizations conduct exporting activities for several
producers—often of primary products such as fruits or nuts—and are partly under their administrative control. Export-management companies agree to manage a company’s export activities for a fee.
Indirect export has two advantages. First, there is less investment: The firm doesn’t have to develop an export department, an overseas sales force, or a set of international contacts. Second,
there’s less risk: Because international marketing intermediaries bring know-how and services to
the relationship, the seller will make fewer mistakes.

Direct
investment

Commitment, Risk, Control, and Profit Potential

•

Joint
ventures

Licensing

Direct
exporting

Indirect
exporting

|Fig. 21.2|

Five Modes of Entry
into Foreign Markets

604

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Companies may eventually decide to handle their own exports.35 The investment and risk are
somewhat greater, but so is the potential return. Direct exporting happens in several ways:
•
•
•
•

Domestic-based export department or division. A purely service function may evolve into a
self-contained export department operating as its own profit center.
Overseas sales branch or subsidiary. The sales branch handles sales and distribution and perhaps warehousing and promotion as well. It often serves as a display and customer-service center.
Traveling export sales representatives. Home-based sales representatives travel abroad to
find business.
Foreign-based distributors or agents. These third parties can hold limited or exclusive rights
to represent the company in that country.

Many companies use direct or indirect exporting to “test the waters” before building a plant and
manufacturing their product overseas. A company does not necessarily have to attend international
trade shows if it can effectively use the Internet to attract new customers overseas, support existing
customers who live abroad, source from international suppliers, and build global brand awareness.
Successful companies adapt their Web sites to provide country-specific content and services to
their highest-potential international markets, ideally in the local language. Finding free information about trade and exporting has never been easier. Here are some places to start a search:

www.trade.gov

U.S. Department of Commerce’s International Trade Administration

www.exim.gov

Export-Import Bank of the United States

www.sba.gov

U.S. Small Business Administration

www.bis.doc.gov

Bureau of Industry and Security, a branch of the Commerce Department

Many states’ export-promotion offices also have online resources and allow businesses to link to
their sites.

Licensing
Licensing is a simple way to engage in international marketing. The licensor issues a license to a foreign company to use a manufacturing process, trademark, patent, trade secret, or other item of value
for a fee or royalty. The licensor gains entry at little risk; the licensee gains production expertise or a
well-known product or brand name.
The licensor, however, has less control over the licensee than over its own production and sales
facilities. If the licensee is very successful, the firm has given up profits, and if and when the contract ends, it might find it has created a competitor. To prevent this, the licensor usually supplies
some proprietary product ingredients or components (as Coca-Cola does). But the best strategy is
to lead in innovation so the licensee will continue to depend on the licensor.
Licensing arrangements vary. Companies such as Hyatt and Marriott sell management contracts
to owners of foreign hotels to manage these businesses for a fee. The management firm may have
the option to purchase some share in the managed company within a stated period.
In contract manufacturing, the firm hires local manufacturers to produce the product. When
Sears opened department stores in Mexico and Spain, it found qualified local manufacturers to
produce many of its products. Contract manufacturing reduces the company’s control over the
process and risks loss of potential profits. However, it offers a chance to start faster, with the opportunity to partner with or buy out the local manufacturer later.
Finally, a company can enter a foreign market through franchising, a more complete form of licensing. The franchisor offers a complete brand concept and operating system. In return, the franchisee
invests in and pays certain fees to the franchisor. McDonald’s, Ramada, and Avis have entered scores of
countries by franchising their retail concepts and making their marketing culturally relevant.36

KFC Corporation KFC is the world’s largest fast-food chicken chain,
serving more than 12 million customers at more than 5,200 restaurants in the United
States and more than 15,000 units in 109 countries and territories around the world. KFC
is world famous for its Original Recipe fried chicken—made with the same secret blend of

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

| CHAPTER 21

605

11 herbs and spices Colonel Harland Sanders perfected more than a
half-century ago. Its success in Asia is instructive:
•

When KFC entered the Japanese market in 1970, the Japanese saw
fast food as artificial, made by mechanical means, and unhealthy. To
build trust in the brand, advertising depicted Colonel Sanders’s
beginnings in Kentucky to convey Southern hospitality, old U.S.
tradition, and authentic home cooking. The campaign was hugely
successful. KFC now offers sesame and soy sauce–flavored chicken
and a panko-fried salmon sandwich.

•

In China, KFC is the largest, oldest, most popular, and fastest-growing
quick-service restaurant chain, with over 3,400 locations in 650 towns
or cities and healthy margins of 20 percent per store. Using its own
supply and distribution system, it has expanded quickly into eversmaller cities. The company has also tailored its menu to local tastes with items such as the Dragon
Twister, a sandwich stuffed with chicken strips, Peking duck sauce, cucumbers, and scallions. KFC even
has a Chinese mascot—a kid-friendly character named Chicky, which the company boasts has become
“the Ronald McDonald of China.”

Joint Ventures
Historically, foreign investors have often joined local investors in a joint venture company in which
they share ownership and control. To reach more geographic and technological markets and to diversify its investments and risk, GE Money—GE’s retail lending arm—views joint ventures as one
of its “most powerful strategic tools.” It has formed joint ventures with financial institutions in
South Korea, Spain, Turkey, and elsewhere.37 Emerging markets, especially large, complex countries
such as China and India, see much joint venture action.
A joint venture may be necessary or desirable for economic or political reasons. The foreign firm
might lack the financial, physical, or managerial resources to undertake the venture alone, or the foreign government might require joint ownership as a condition for entry. Joint ownership has drawbacks. The partners might disagree over investment, marketing, or other policies. One might want to
reinvest earnings for growth, the other to declare more dividends. Joint ownership can also prevent
a multinational company from carrying out specific manufacturing and marketing policies on a
worldwide basis.
The value of a partnership can extend far beyond increased sales or access to distribution. Good
partners share “brand values” that help maintain brand consistency across markets. For example,
McDonald’s fierce commitment to product and service standardization is one reason its retail outlets are so similar around the world. McDonald’s handpicks its global partners one by one to find
“compulsive achievers” who will put forth the desired effort.

Direct Investment
The ultimate form of foreign involvement is direct ownership: the foreign company can buy part or
full interest in a local company or build its own manufacturing or service facilities. Cisco had no
presence in India before 2005 but opened a second headquarters in Bangalore to take advantage of
opportunities in India and other locations such as Dubai.38
If the market is large enough, direct investment offers distinct advantages. First, the firm secures
cost economies through cheaper labor or raw materials, government incentives, and freight savings.
Second, the firm strengthens its image in the host country because it creates jobs. Third, the firm
deepens its relationship with government, customers, local suppliers, and distributors, enabling it
to better adapt its products to the local environment. Fourth, the firm retains full control over its
investment and therefore can develop manufacturing and marketing policies that serve its longterm international objectives. Fifth, the firm assures itself of access to the market in case the host
country insists locally purchased goods have domestic content.
The main disadvantage of direct investment is that the firm exposes a large investment to risks
such as blocked or devalued currencies, worsening markets, or expropriation. If the host country
requires substantial severance for employees, reducing or closing operations can be expensive.

By adapting its marketing to different regions of the world, KFC
has met with much global success,
such as with its many restaurants
in Tokyo, Japan.

606

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

TABLE 21.2

Globally Standardized Marketing Pros and Cons

Advantages
Economies of scale in production and distribution
Lower marketing costs
Power and scope
Consistency in brand image
Ability to leverage good ideas quickly and efficiently
Uniformity of marketing practices
Disadvantages
Ignores differences in consumer needs, wants, and usage patterns for products
Ignores differences in consumer response to marketing programs and activities
Ignores differences in brand and product development and the competitive environment
Ignores differences in the legal environment
Ignores differences in marketing institutions
Ignores differences in administrative procedures

Deciding on the Marketing
Program
International companies must decide how much to adapt their marketing strategy to local conditions.39 At one extreme is a standardized marketing program worldwide, which promises the lowest
costs;
Table 21.2 summarizes some pros and cons. At the other extreme is an adapted marketing
program in which the company, consistent with the marketing concept, believes consumer needs
vary and tailors marketing to each target group.

Global Similarities and Differences
As this Prague waiter demonstrates,
many Czech people like to drink
beer!

The development of the Web, the spread of cable and satellite TV, and the global linking of telecommunications networks have led to a convergence of lifestyles. Increasingly common needs and
wants have created global markets for more standardized products, particularly among the young
middle class. Once the butt of jokes, after being acquired by VW, the Czech carmaker Skoda used its
investments to upgrade its quality and image and offer an affordable
option to lower-income consumers worldwide.40
At the same time, consumers still vary across markets in significant ways.41 The median age is about 25 in India and China, and
around 43 in Japan, Germany, and Italy. When asked if they are more
concerned with getting a specific brand than the best price, roughly
two-thirds of U.S. consumers agreed, compared to around 80 percent in Russia and India.42 Consider the following beverage facts.43
•

•

•

U.S. per capita consumption of soft drinks is 760 eight-ounce
servings, the highest in the world. Mexicans drink 674 servings
per year, Brazilians 315, Russians 149, and the Chinese 39.
When it comes to beer, the Czech Republic leads the pack in
Europe with 81.9 liters per capita; Norway is among the lowest
at 40.3 liters.
With wine, Portugal tops Europe with 33.1 liters per capita,
while Finland is among the lowest at 9.9 liters.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

| CHAPTER 21

607

Consumer behavior may reflect cultural differences that can be pronounced across countries.44
Hofstede identifies four cultural dimensions that differentiate countries:45
1.

2.
3.
4.

Individualism versus collectivism—In collectivist societies, the self-worth of an individual is
rooted more in the social system than in individual achievement (high collectivism: Japan;
low: United States).
High versus low power distance—High power distance cultures tend to be less egalitarian
(high: Russia; low: Nordic countries).
Masculine versus feminine—This dimension measures how much the culture is dominated
by assertive males versus nurturing females (highly masculine: Japan; low: Nordic countries).
Weak versus strong uncertainty avoidance—Uncertainty avoidance indicates how risk-aversive people are (high avoidance: Greece; low: Jamaica).

Consumer behavior differences as well as historical market factors lead marketers to position
brands differently in different markets.46
•
•
•

Heineken beer is a high-end super-premium offering in the United States but middle-of-theroad in its Dutch home market.
Honda automobiles denote speed, youth, and energy in Japan and quality and reliability in the
United States.
The Toyota Camry is the quintessential middle-class car in the United States but is at the high
end in China, though in the two markets the cars differ only in cosmetic ways.

Marketing Adaptation
Because of all these differences, most products require at least some adaptation. Even Coca-Cola is
sweeter or less carbonated in certain countries. Rather than assuming it can introduce its domestic
product “as is” in another country, the company should review the following elements and determine which add more revenue than cost if adapted:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Product features
Labeling
Colors
Materials
Sales promotion
Advertising media

•
•
•
•
•

Brand name
Packaging
Advertising execution
Prices
Advertising themes

The best global brands are consistent in theme but reflect significant differences in consumer behavior, brand development, competitive forces, and the legal or political environment.47 Oft-heard—
and sometime modified—advice to marketers of global brands is to: “Think Global, Act Local.” In
that spirit, HSBC is even explicitly positioned as “The World’s Local Bank.” Take McDonald’s for
example.48

McDonald’s McDonald’s allows countries and
regions to customize its basic layout and menu staples. In
China, corn replaces fries in Happy Meals, some U.S. stores
blend fruit smoothies, and Australia and France have Starbuckslike lounges. In India, the mutton-based Maharaja Mac replaces
the beefy Big Mac, and cottage cheese wraps and potato patties are offered
for vegetarians. In cities plagued by traffic tie-ups like Manila, Taipei, Jakarta,
and Cairo, McDonald’s delivers via fleets of motor scooters.
Companies must make sure their brands are relevant to consumers in every market they enter. (See “Marketing Memo: The Ten
Commandments of Global Branding.”)
We next consider some specific issues in developing global
product, communications, pricing, and distribution strategies.

McDonald’s customizes its menu
offerings and even its service
delivery to suit the markets to
which it sells—in busy cities, it
may deliver meals via scooters.

608

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

marketing

Memo

The Ten Commandments of Global Branding

These guidelines can help a company retain the advantages of global branding while minimizing potential disadvantages:
1. Understand the global branding landscape. One international market is
rarely identical to or completely different from another in brand development, consumer behavior, competitive activity, or legal restrictions.
2. Avoid shortcuts in brand building. Build from the bottom up, creating
awareness before brand image (strategy) and developing the right
sources of brand equity (tactics).
3. Establish a marketing infrastructure. Build marketing infrastructure from
scratch or adapt to and modify existing infrastructure in other countries.
4. Embrace integrated marketing communications. Many forms of communication work in overseas markets, not just advertising.
5. Establish brand partnerships. Most global brands carefully choose marketing partners that help improve distribution, profitability, and added value.

6. Balance standardization and customization. Packaging and brand name
can often be standardized, while distribution channels and communications typically require greater customization.
7. Balance global and local control. Companies must balance global and
local control within the organization and distribute decision making between global and local managers.
8. Establish operable guidelines. Brand definition and guidelines let marketers everywhere know what to do and not do. The goal is to communicate and enforce rules for positioning and marketing the brand.
9. Implement a global brand-equity measurement system. Information
from a global brand-equity system lets marketers make the best shortrun tactical and long-run strategic decisions in each market.
10. Leverage brand elements. Proper design and implementation of brand
name and trademarked identifiers can be an invaluable source of
brand equity worldwide.

Source: Adapted from Kevin Lane Keller and Sanjay Sood, “The Ten Commandments of Global Branding,” Asian Journal of Marketing 8, no. 2 (2001), pp. 97–108.

Global Product Strategies
Developing global product strategies requires knowing what types of products or services are easily
standardized and appropriate adaptation strategies.

PRODUCT STANDARDIZATION Some products cross borders without adaptation better
than others. While mature products have separate histories or positions in different markets,
consumer knowledge about new products is generally the same everywhere because perceptions
have yet to be formed. Many leading Internet brands—Google, eBay, Amazon.com—made quick
progress in overseas markets.
High-end products also benefit from standardization, because quality and prestige often can be
marketed similarly across countries. Food and beverage marketers find it more challenging to standardize given widely varying tastes and cultural habits. Culture and wealth factors influence how
quickly a new product takes off in a country, although adoption and diffusion rates are becoming
more alike across countries over time.49
A company may emphasize its products differently across markets. IBM takes a two-track
approach for its services business: because U.S. clients often are economizing, it focuses on helping
them cut costs; for developing-market clients seeking to modernize and catch up with other countries, IBM helps develop their technology infrastructure. In its medical-equipment business, Philips
reserves higher-end, premium products for developed markets and emphasizes products with basic
functionality and affordability in developing markets.50
PRODUCT ADAPTATION STRATEGIES Warren Keegan has distinguished five product
and communications adaptation strategies (see
Figure 21.3).51 We review the product
strategies here and the communication strategies in the next section.
Straight extension introduces the product in the foreign market without any change. Tempting
because it requires no additional R&D expense, manufacturing retooling, or promotional modification, it’s been successful for cameras, consumer electronics, and many machine tools. In other
cases, it has been a disaster. Campbell Soup Company lost an estimated $30 million introducing
condensed soups in England; consumers saw expensive small-sized cans and didn’t realize water
needed to be added.
Product adaptation alters the product to meet local conditions or preferences. Flexible
manufacturing makes it easier to do so on several levels.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

Communications

Product

•

•

•
•

Do Not Change
Product

Adapt
Product

Do Not Change
Communications

Straight
extension

Product
adaptation

Adapt
Communications

Communication
adaptation

Dual
adaptation

|Fig. 21.3|
Develop New
Product

Product
invention

•

Backward invention reintroduces earlier product forms well adapted to a
foreign country’s needs. The National Cash Register Company reintroduced its
crank-operated cash register at half the price of a modern model and sold
substantial numbers in Latin America and Africa.
Forward invention creates a new product to meet a need in another country.
Less-developed countries need low-cost, high-protein foods. Companies such as
Quaker Oats, Swift, and Monsanto have researched their nutrition requirements, formulated new foods, and developed advertising to gain product trial
and acceptance.

BRAND ELEMENT ADAPTATION When they launch products and services
globally, marketers may need to change certain brand elements.53 Even a brand name
may require a choice between phonetic and semantic translations.54 When Clairol
introduced the “Mist Stick,” a curling iron, in Germany, it found that mist is slang for
manure. Brand slogans or ad taglines sometimes need to be changed too:55
•
•
•

•

Five International
Product and
Communication
Strategies

A company can produce a regional version of its product, such as a Western European version.
Finnish cellular phone superstar Nokia customized its 6100 series phone for every major
market. Developers built in rudimentary voice recognition for Asia, where keyboards are a
problem, and raised the ring volume to make it audible on crowded Asian streets.
A company can produce a country version. Kraft blends different coffees for the British (who
drink coffee with milk), the French (who drink it black), and Latin Americans (who want a
chicory taste).
A company can produce a city version—for instance, a beer to meet Munich’s or Tokyo’s tastes.
A company can produce different retailer versions, such as one coffee brew for the Migros
chain store and another for the Cooperative chain store, both in Switzerland.

Some companies have learned adaptation the hard way. The Euro Disney theme park, launched
outside Paris in 1992, was harshly criticized as an example of U.S. cultural imperialism that ignored
French customs and values, such as serving wine with meals. As one Euro Disney executive noted,
“When we first launched, there was the belief that it was enough to be Disney. Now we realize our
guests need to be welcomed on the basis of their own culture and travel habits.” Renamed
Disneyland Paris, the theme park eventually became Europe’s biggest tourist attraction—even more
popular than the Eiffel Tower—by implementing a number of changes and more local touches.52
Product invention creates something new. It can take two forms:
•

| CHAPTER 21

When Coors put its brand slogan “Turn it loose” into Spanish, some read it as
“suffer from diarrhea.”
A laundry soap ad claiming to wash “really dirty parts” was translated in
French-speaking Quebec to read “a soap for washing private parts.”
Perdue’s slogan—“It takes a tough man to make a tender chicken”—was
rendered into Spanish as “It takes a sexually excited man to make a chick
affectionate.”
Electrolux’s British ad line for its vacuum cleaners—“Nothing sucks like an
Electrolux”—would certainly not lure customers in the United States!
Table 21.3 lists some other famous marketing mistakes in this area.

Disneyland Paris found greater
success when it adapted more
closely to the local culture and
traditions in France.

609

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

TABLE 21.3

Classic Blunders in Global Marketing

• Hallmark cards failed in France, where consumers dislike syrupy sentiment and prefer writing their
own cards.
• Philips became profitable in Japan only after reducing the size of its coffeemakers to fit smaller
kitchens and its shavers to fit smaller hands.
• Coca-Cola withdrew its big two-liter bottle in Spain after discovering that few Spaniards owned
refrigerators that could accommodate it.
• General Foods’ Tang initially failed in France when positioned as a substitute for orange juice at
breakfast. The French drink little orange juice and almost never at breakfast.
• Kellogg’s Pop-Tarts failed in Britain because fewer homes have toasters than in the United States,
and the product was too sweet for British tastes.
• The U.S. campaign for Procter & Gamble’s Crest toothpaste initially failed in Mexico. Mexicans did not
care as much about the decay-prevention benefit, nor did scientifically oriented advertising appeal.
• General Foods squandered millions trying to introduce packaged cake mixes to Japan, where only
3 percent of homes at the time were equipped with ovens.
• S.C. Johnson’s wax floor polish initially failed in Japan. It made floors too slippery for a culture
where people do not wear shoes at home.

Global Communication Strategies
Changing marketing communications for each local market is a process called communication
adaptation. If it adapts both the product and the communications, the company engages in dual
adaptation.
Consider the message. The company can use one message everywhere, varying only the language, name, and perhaps colors to avoid taboos in some countries.56 Purple is associated with
death in Burma and some Latin American nations, white is a mourning color in India, and in
Malaysia green connotes disease.57
The second possibility is to use the same message and creative theme globally but adapt the execution. GE’s global “Ecomagination” ad campaign substitutes creative content in Asia and the Middle East
to reflect the cultural interest there. Even in the high-tech space, local adaptations may be necessary.58

Apple Apple Computer’s highly successful “Mac vs. PC” ad campaign featured two
actors bantering. One is hip (Apple), the other nerdy (PC). Apple dubbed the ads for Spain,
France, Germany, and Italy but chose to reshoot and rescript for the United Kingdom and
Japan—two important markets with unique advertising and comedy cultures. The UK ads
followed a similar formula but used two well-known actors in character and tweaked the jokes
to reflect British humor; the Japanese ads avoided direct comparisons and were more subtle
in tone. Played by comedians from a local troupe called the Rahmens, the two characters were more alike
and represented work (PC) vs. home (Mac).
Apple

610

The third approach, which Coca-Cola and Goodyear have used, consists of developing a global
pool of ads from which each country selects the most appropriate. Finally, some companies allow
their country managers to create country-specific ads—within guidelines, of course. The challenge
is to make the message as compelling and effective as in the home market.

GLOBAL ADAPTATIONS Companies that adapt their communications wrestle with a
number of challenges. They first must ensure their communications are legally and culturally
acceptable. Beer, wine, and spirits cannot be advertised or sold in many Muslim countries. Tobacco
products are subject to strict regulation in many places. U.S. toy makers were surprised to learn that

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

in many countries (Norway and Sweden, for example) no TV ads may be directed at children under
12. To play it safe, McDonald’s advertises itself as a family restaurant in Sweden.
Firms next must check their creative strategies and communication approaches for appropriateness. Comparative ads, although acceptable and even common in the United States and Canada, are
less frequent in the United Kingdom, unacceptable in Japan, and illegal in India and Brazil. The EU
seems to have a very low tolerance for comparative advertising and prohibits bashing rivals in ads.
Companies also must be prepared to vary their messages’ appeal.59 In advertising its hair care
products, Helene Curtis observed that middle-class British women wash their hair frequently,
Spanish women less so. Japanese women avoid overwashing for fear of removing protective oils.
Language can vary too, whether the local language, another such as English, or some combination.60
Many messages need adjustment because the brand is at an earlier stage of development in its
new market. Consumer education about the product itself may then need to accompany brand
development efforts.
•
•

In certain developing markets in Asia, consumers loved the Coca-Cola brand but had never
tasted it. They needed to be advised to drink it cold.61
When launching Chik shampoo in rural areas of South India, where hair is washed with soap,
CavinKare showed people how to use the product through live “touch and feel” demonstrations
and free sachets at fairs.62

Personal selling tactics may need to change too. The direct, no-nonsense approach favored in
the United States (“let’s get down to business” and “what’s in it for me”) may not work as well in
Europe or Asia as an indirect, subtle approach.63

Global Pricing Strategies
Multinationals selling abroad must contend with price escalation and transfer prices (and dumping
charges). Two particularly thorny pricing problems are gray markets and counterfeits.

PRICE ESCALATION A Gucci handbag may sell for $120 in Italy and $240 in the United States.
Why? Gucci must add the cost of transportation, tariffs, importer margin, wholesaler margin, and
retailer margin to its factory price. Price escalation from these added costs and currencyfluctuation risk might make the price two to five times as much in another country to earn the
same profit for the manufacturer.
Companies have three choices for setting prices in different countries:
1.

2.

3.

Set a uniform price everywhere. PepsiCo might want to charge 75 cents for Pepsi everywhere in
the world, but then it would earn quite different profit rates in different countries. Also, this strategy would make the price too high in poor countries and not high enough in rich countries.
Set a market-based price in each country. PepsiCo would charge what each country could afford, but this strategy ignores differences in the actual cost from country to country. It could also
motivate intermediaries in low-price countries to reship their Pepsi to high-price countries.64
Set a cost-based price in each country. Here PepsiCo would use a standard markup of its costs
everywhere, but this strategy might price it out of markets where its costs are high.

IKEA

When companies sell their wares over the Internet, price becomes transparent and price differentiation between countries declines. Consider an online training course. Whereas the price of a
classroom-delivered day of training can vary significantly from the United States to France to
Thailand, the price of an online-delivered day would be similar everywhere.
In another new global pricing challenge, countries with overcapacity, cheap currencies, and the
need to export aggressively have pushed prices down and devalued their currencies. Sluggish demand and reluctance to pay higher prices make selling in these markets difficult. Here is what IKEA
did to compete in China’s challenging pricing market.65

IKEA

IKEA has used market-penetration pricing to get a lock on China’s surging market
for home furnishings. When the Swedish home furnishings giant opened its first store in Beijing in
2002, shops were selling copies of its designs at a fraction of IKEA’s prices. The only way to lure
China’s frugal customers was to drastically slash prices. Western brands in China usually price
products such as makeup and running shoes 20 percent to 30 percent higher than in their other

| CHAPTER 21

611

612

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

markets, both to make up for China’s high import taxes and to give their products added cachet. By stocking its
Chinese stores with Chinese-made products, IKEA has been able to slash prices as low as 70 percent below
their level outside China. Although it still contends with persistent knockoffs, IKEA maintains sizable stores in
Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chengdu, and Tianjin, opening one or two new locations each year.

TRANSFER PRICES A different problem arises when one unit charges another unit in the same
company a transfer price for goods it ships to its foreign subsidiaries. If the company charges a
subsidiary too high a price, it may end up paying higher tariff duties, although it may pay lower
income taxes in the foreign country. If the company charges its subsidiary too low a price, it can be
accused of dumping, charging either less than its costs or less than it charges at home in order to enter
or win a market. Various governments are watching for abuses and often force companies to charge
the arm’s-length price—the price charged by other competitors for the same or a similar product.
When the U.S. Department of Commerce finds evidence of dumping, it can levy a dumping
tariff on the guilty company. After finding that exporters and producers from China were selling
off-road tires in the United States at 11 percent to 210 percent below fair market value, the U.S.
Department of Commerce imposed a duty of 11 percent to 52 percent on four Chinese tire
manufactures and an average duty of 25 percent on 23 other tire makers there.66

Counterfeit products are a major
headache for luxury-goods makers.

GRAY MARKETS Many multinationals are plagued by the gray market, which diverts branded
products from authorized distribution channels either in-country or across international borders.
Dealers in the low-price country find ways to sell some of their products in higher-price countries, thus
earning more. Often a company finds some enterprising distributors buying more than they can sell in
their own country and reshipping the goods to another country to take advantage of price differences.
Research suggests that gray market activity accounts for billions of dollars in revenue each year
and makes up about 8 percent of total global IT sales of $725 billion. Information technology
manufacturers lose about $10 billion in profits to the gray market each year.67
Gray markets create a free-rider problem, making legitimate distributors’ investments in supporting
a manufacturer’s product less productive and selective distribution systems more intensive. They harm
distributor relations, tarnish the manufacturer’s brand equity, and undermine the integrity of the distribution channel. They can even pose risks to consumers if the seemingly brand-new product they
think they are buying is damaged, remarked, obsolete, without warranty or support, or just counterfeit.
Multinationals try to prevent gray markets by policing the distributors, raising their prices to
lower-cost distributors, or altering product characteristics or service warranties for different countries.68 3Com successfully sued several companies in Canada (for a total of $10 million) that provided written and oral misrepresentations to get deep discounts on 3Com networking equipment.
The equipment, worth millions of dollars, was to be sold to a U.S. educational software company
and sent to China and Australia but instead ended up back in the United States.
One research study found that gray market activity was most effectively deterred when penalties
were severe, manufacturers were able to detect violations or mete out punishments in a timely fashion, or both.69
COUNTERFEIT PRODUCTS Name a popular brand, and
chances are a counterfeit version of it exists somewhere in the world.70
Counterfeiting is estimated to cost over a trillion dollars a year. U.S.
Customs and Border Protection seized $260 million worth of goods
in 2009; the chief culprits were China (81 percent) and Hong Kong
(10 percent), and the chief product was footwear (38 percent).71
Fakes take a big bite of the profits of luxury brands such as
Hermès, LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, and Tiffany, but
faulty counterfeits can literally kill people. Cell phones with counterfeit batteries, fake brake pads made of compressed grass trimmings,
and counterfeit airline parts pose safety risks to consumers. Virtually
every product is vulnerable. As one anticounterfeit consultant
observed, “If you can make it, they can fake it.” Defending against
counterfeiters is a never-ending struggle; some observers estimate
that a new security system can be just months old before counterfeiters start nibbling at sales again.72

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

The Web has been especially problematic. After surveying thousands of items, LVMH estimated
90 percent of Louis Vuitton and Christian Dior pieces listed on eBay were fakes, prompting the firm
to sue. Manufacturers are fighting back online with Web-crawling software that detects fraud and
automatically warns apparent violators without the need for any human intervention. Acushnet,
maker of Titleist golf clubs and balls, shut down 75 auctions of knockoff gear in one day with just
one mouse click.73
Web-crawling technology searches for counterfeit storefronts and sales by detecting domain
names similar to legitimate brands and unauthorized Web sites that plaster brand trademarks and
logos on their homepages. It also checks for keywords such as cheap, discount, authentic, and factory
variants, as well as colors that products were never made in and prices that are far too low.

| CHAPTER 21

Seller

Seller's
international
marketing
headquarters

Global Distribution Strategies

Channels
between
nations

Too many U.S. manufacturers think their job is done once the product leaves the factory. They
should instead note how the product moves within the foreign country and take a whole-channel
view of distributing products to final users.

CHANNEL ENTRY
Figure 21.4 shows three links between the seller and the final buyer. In
the first, seller’s international marketing headquarters, the export department or international
division makes decisions about channels and other marketing activities. The second link, channels
between nations, gets the products to the borders of the foreign nation. Decisions made in this link
include the types of intermediaries (agents, trading companies), type of transportation (air, sea),
and financing and risk management. The third link, channels within foreign nations, gets products
from their entry point to final buyers and users.
When multinationals first enter a country, they prefer to work with local distributors with good
local knowledge, but friction often arises later.74 The multinational complains that the local distributor doesn’t invest in business growth, doesn’t follow company policy, and doesn’t share enough
information. The local distributor complains of insufficient corporate support, impossible goals,
and confusing policies. The multinational must choose the right distributors, invest in them, and
set up performance goals to which they can agree.75
CHANNEL DIFFERENCES Distribution channels across countries vary considerably. To sell
consumer products in Japan, companies must work through one of the most complicated
distribution systems in the world. They sell to a general wholesaler, who sells to a product
wholesaler, who sells to a product-specialty wholesaler, who sells to a regional wholesaler, who sells
to a local wholesaler, who finally sells to retailers. All these distribution levels can make the
consumer’s price double or triple the importer’s price. Taking these same consumer products to
tropical Africa, the company might sell to an import wholesaler, who sells to several jobbers, who
sell to petty traders (mostly women) working in local markets.
Another difference is the size and character of retail units abroad. Large-scale retail chains dominate
the U.S. scene, but much foreign retailing is in the hands of small, independent retailers. Millions of
Indian retailers operate tiny shops or sell in open markets. Markups are high, but the real price comes
down through haggling. Incomes are low, most homes lack storage and refrigeration, and people shop
daily for whatever they can carry home on foot or bicycle. In India, people often buy one cigarette at a
time. Breaking bulk remains an important function of intermediaries and helps perpetuate long channels of distribution, a major obstacle to the expansion of large-scale retailing in developing countries.
Sometimes companies mistakenly adapt infrastructure strategies that were critical success
factors, only to discover that these changes eroded the brand’s competitive advantage. Dell
Computer initially abandoned its direct distribution strategy in Europe for a traditional retailer
network of existing channels, with poor results. Ignoring critics who claimed the direct distribution
model would never work in Europe, Dell then revamped its direct approach, relaunching its
personal computer line with a new management team to execute the direct model it had pioneered
in the United States, finding greater success as a result.
Increasingly, retailers are moving into new global markets, offering firms the opportunity to sell
across more countries and creating a challenge to local distributors and retailers.76 France’s
Carrefour, Germany’s Metro, and United Kingdom’s Tesco have all established global positions. But
some of the world’s most successful retailers have had mixed success abroad. Despite concerted
efforts and earlier success in Latin America and China, Walmart had to withdraw from both the
German and South Korean markets.

Channels within
foreign nations

Final
buyers

|Fig. 21.4|

Whole-Channel
Concept for
International
Marketing

613

614

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Country-of-Origin Effects
Country-of-origin perceptions are the mental associations and beliefs triggered by a country.
Government officials want to strengthen their country’s image to help domestic marketers who export, and to attract foreign firms and investors. Marketers want to use positive country-of-origin
perceptions to sell their products and services.

Building Country Images

Although the film Borat poked fun
at Kazakhstan, it also created
much public awareness of and
interest in the country.

Governments now recognize that the images of their cities and countries affect more than tourism
and have important value in commerce. Attracting foreign business can boost the local economy,
provide jobs, and improve infrastructure. Image can also help sell products. For its first global ad
campaign for Infiniti luxury cars, Nissan chose to tap into its Japanese roots and association with
Japanese-driven art and engineering.77
Countries are being marketed like any other brand.78 New Zealand developed concerted marketing programs both to sell its products outside the country, via its New Zealand Way program,
and to attract tourists by showing the dramatic landscapes featured in The Lord of the Rings film
trilogy. Both efforts reinforce the image of New Zealand as fresh and pure.79
Another film affected the image of a country in an entirely different way. Although Kazakhstan
has a positive story to tell given its huge size, rich natural resources, and rapid modernization,
British comedian Sacha Baron Cohen’s mock documentary Borat portrayed the country in a sometimes crude and vulgar light. As one government official noted, “the only fact of the movie is the
geographic location of Kazakhstan.” Fortunately, the tongue-in-cheek film also created awareness
and interest in the country and what has been called the “Borat Bounce,” an unanticipated surge in
tourism.80
Attitudes toward countries can change over time. Before World War II, Japan had a poor image,
which the success of Sony with its Trinitron TV sets and of Japanese automakers Honda and Toyota
helped change. A strong company that emerges as a global player can do wonders for a country’s
image. Relying partly on the global success of Nokia, Finland campaigned to enhance its image as a
center of high-tech innovation.81
Current events can also shape the image of a country. With public unrest and violent protests
surrounding the austerity program to address Greece’s debt crisis, tourist bookings there dropped
as much as 30 percent.82

Consumer Perceptions of Country of Origin
Global marketers know that buyers hold distinct attitudes and beliefs about brands
or products from different countries.83 These perceptions can be an attribute in decision making or influence other attributes in the process (“if it’s French, it must be
stylish”). The mere fact that a brand is perceived as successful on a global stage—
whether it sends a quality signal, taps into cultural myths, or reinforces a sense of
social responsibility—may lend credibility and respect.84 Several studies have found
the following:85
•
•
•
•

•

People are often ethnocentric and favorably predisposed to their own country’s
products, unless they come from a less developed country.
The more favorable a country’s image, the more prominently the “Made in...”
label should be displayed.
The impact of country of origin varies with the type of product. Consumers
want to know where a car was made, but not the lubricating oil.
Certain countries enjoy a reputation for certain goods: Japan for automobiles
and consumer electronics; the United States for high-tech innovations,
soft drinks, toys, cigarettes, and jeans; France for wine, perfume, and
luxury goods.
Sometimes country-of-origin perception can encompass an entire country’s
products. In one study, Chinese consumers in Hong Kong perceived U.S.
products as prestigious, Japanese products as innovative, and Chinese products
as cheap.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

| CHAPTER 21

615

Marketers must look at country-of-origin perceptions from both a domestic and a foreign
perspective. In the domestic market, these perceptions may stir consumers’ patriotic notions or
remind them of their past. As international trade grows, consumers may view certain brands as
symbolically important in their own cultural heritage and identity.
Patriotic appeals underlie marketing strategies all over the world, but they can lack uniqueness
and even be overused, especially in economic or political crises. Many small businesses tap into
community pride to emphasize their local roots. To be successful, these need to be clearly local and
offer appealing product and service offerings.86
Sometimes consumers don’t know where brands come from. In surveys, they routinely guess
that Heineken is German and Nokia is Japanese (they are Dutch and Finnish, respectively). Few
consumers know Häagen-Dazs and Estée Lauder originated in the United States.
With outsourcing and foreign manufacturing, it’s hard to know what the country of origin really is anyway. Only 65 percent of the content of a Ford Mustang comes from the United States or
Canada, whereas the Toyota Sienna is assembled in Indiana with 90 percent local components.
Foreign automakers are pouring money into North America, investing in plants, suppliers, and
dealerships as well as design, testing, and research centers. But what makes a product more
“American”—having a higher percentage of North American components or creating more jobs in
North America? The two measures may not lead to the same conclusion.87
Many brands have gone to great lengths to weave themselves into the cultural fabric of their foreign markets. One Coca-Cola executive tells of a young child visiting the United States from Japan
who commented to her parents on seeing a Coca-Cola vending machine—“Look, they have CocaCola too!” As far as she was concerned, Coca-Cola was a Japanese brand.
Even when the United States has not been that popular, its brands typically have been. One
recent study found that 70 percent of consumers in developing countries, ranging from
Argentina to the United Arab Emirates, felt local products weren’t as good as international
brands.88 In Saudi Arabia, Kraft packaged cheese, Lay’s potato chips, and McDonald’s restaurants were all viewed as top brands in their categories. As one marketer said of the study,
“Regardless of all the problems we have as a country, we are still looked to as the consumer
capital of the world.”89
Companies can target niches to establish a footing in new markets. China’s leading maker of
refrigerators, washing machines, and air conditioners, Haier, is building a beachhead among U.S.
college students who loyally buy its mini-fridges at Walmart and elsewhere. Haier’s long-term
plans are to introduce innovative products in other areas, such as flat-screen TV sets and winecooling cabinets.90

China’s Haier has ambitious plans
to sell its many different appliances
in the United States and other
markets.

616

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Deciding on the Marketing
Organization
Companies manage their international marketing activities in three ways: through export departments, international divisions, or a global organization.

Export Department
A firm normally gets into international marketing by simply shipping out its goods. If its international sales expand, it organizes an export department consisting of a sales manager and a few assistants. As sales increase, the export department expands to include various marketing services so
the company can go after business more aggressively. If the firm moves into joint ventures or direct
investment, the export department will no longer be adequate to manage international operations.

International Division
Sooner or later, companies that engage in several international markets and ventures create an international division to handle all this activity. The unit is headed by a division president who sets
goals and budgets and is responsible for the company’s international growth.
The international division’s corporate staff consists of functional specialists who provide
services to various operating units. Operating units can be geographical organizations. Reporting
to the international-division president might be regional vice presidents for North America,
Latin America, Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and the Far East. Reporting to the regional vice
presidents are country managers responsible for a sales force, sales branches, distributors, and
licensees in the respective countries. Or the operating units may be world product groups, each
with an international vice president responsible for worldwide sales of each product group. The
vice presidents may draw on corporate-staff area specialists for expertise on different geographical areas. Finally, operating units may be international subsidiaries, each headed by a president
who reports to the president of the international division.

Global Organization
Several firms have become truly global organizations. Their top corporate management and staff
plan worldwide manufacturing facilities, marketing policies, financial flows, and logistical systems.
The global operating units report directly to the chief executive or executive committee, not to the
head of an international division. The firm trains its executives in worldwide operations, recruits
management from many countries, purchases components and supplies where it can obtain them
at least cost, and makes investments where anticipated returns are greatest.
These companies face several organizational complexities. For example, when the firm is pricing
a company’s mainframe computers for a large banking system in Germany, how much influence
should the headquarters product manager have? And the company’s market manager for the banking sector? And the company’s German country manager?
When forces for “global integration” (capital-intensive production, homogeneous demand) are
strong and forces for “national responsiveness” (local standards and barriers, strong local preferences)
are weak, a global strategy that treats the world as a single market can make sense (for example, with
consumer electronics). When the reverse is true, a multinational strategy that treats the world as a portfolio of national opportunities can be more appropriate (such as for food or cleaning products).91
Korea’s globally integrated LG decided to hire a number of top executives from Western firms to
help transform it from “an engineering powerhouse that excelled at manufacturing and selling in
different parts of the world” to a “globally efficient, trend-setting organization.” The new executives
were charged with standardizing the hodgepodge of processes and systems LG had developed in
different markets in purchasing, the supply chain, marketing, and other areas. A single agency
(London’s Bartle Bogle Hegarty) was given global responsibility to sell an increasing number of
higher-end products.92
When both forces prevail to some extent, a “glocal” strategy that standardizes certain elements
and localizes others can be the way to go (for instance, with telecommunications). Many firms seek
a blend of centralized global control from corporate headquarters with input from local and regional marketers. As one top marketer for global brand icon Jack Daniels described the challenges

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

| CHAPTER 21

617

of managing the world’s biggest-selling whiskey brand across 135 countries: “‘Not invented’ here is
a good thing; ‘invented here’ is also a good thing; ‘not invented but improved here’ is the best!”93
Finding the balance can be tricky, though. Coca-Cola adopted a “think local, act local” philosophy,
decentralizing power and responsibility for designing marketing programs and activities. Execution
faltered because many local managers lacked the skills or discipline to do the job. Decidedly un-Cokelike ads appeared—such as skinny-dippers streaking down a beach in Italy—and sales stalled. The
pendulum swung back, and Coke executives in Atlanta resumed a strong strategic role.94
Effectively transferring successful marketing ideas from one region to another is a key priority
for many firms. Rather than developing global products for jointly owned Renault and Nissan,
CEO Carlos Ghosn has mandated that companies design for local tastes and have the flexibility to
export the design to other regions to tap into similar consumer trends. The no-frills Logan was developed by Renault for Eastern Europe and Latin America but found another home in France.
When products cross a region, ideas and a way of thinking may also transfer in the process. Ghosn
teamed Nissan and Renault with Bajaj Auto to sell a $3,000 car in the Indian market, in part to infuse those companies with India’s low-cost design thinking: “They understand frugal engineering,
which is something we aren’t as good at in Europe or Japan.”95

Summary
1. Despite shifting borders, unstable governments, foreign-exchange problems, corruption, and technological
pirating, companies selling in global industries need to
internationalize their operations.
2. Upon deciding to go abroad, a company needs to define its international marketing objectives and policies.
It must determine whether to market in a few or many
countries and rate candidate countries on three criteria: market attractiveness, risk, and competitive
advantage.
3. Developing countries offer a unique set of opportunities
and risks. The “BRIC” countries—Brazil, Russia, India,
and China—plus other significant markets such as
Indonesia and South Africa are a top priority for many
firms.
4. Modes of entry are indirect exporting, direct exporting,
licensing, joint ventures, and direct investment. Each
succeeding strategy entails more commitment, risk,
control, and profit potential.

5. In deciding how much to adapt their marketing programs at the product level, firms can pursue a strategy
of straight extension, product adaptation, or product invention. At the communication level, they may choose
communication adaptation or dual adaptation. At the
price level, firms may encounter price escalation,
dumping, gray markets, and discounted counterfeit
products. At the distribution level, firms need to take a
whole-channel view of distributing products to the final
users. Firms must always consider the cultural, social,
political, technological, environmental, and legal limitations they face in other countries.
6. Country-of-origin perceptions can affect consumers
and businesses alike. Managing those perceptions to
best advantage is a marketing priority.
7. Depending on their level of international involvement,
companies manage international marketing activity in
three ways: through export departments, international
divisions, or a global organization.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is the World Coming Closer Together?

Marketing Discussion
Country of Origin

Many social commentators maintain that youth and teens
are becoming more alike across countries over time.
Others, although not disputing the fact, point out that differences between cultures at even younger ages by far exceed
the similarities.
Take a position: People are becoming more and more
similar versus The differences between people of different cultures far outweigh their similarities.

Think of some of your favorite brands. Do you know where
they come from? Where and how are they made or provided? Do you think knowing these answers would affect
your perceptions of quality or satisfaction?

618

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Marketing Excellence

>>Nokia
Nokia has made a
remarkable transformation over the
past two decades
from an obscure
Finnish conglomerate to a cell
phone powerhouse. Now the
world’s largest
manufacturer of
mobile
telephones, it has
over 1 billion
users and a
global market
share of 33
percent in 2010.
The company sells approximately 11 cell
phones every second and is the standout leader in Asia,
Eastern Europe, and Africa.
Nokia’s transformation started in the early 1990s with
its strategic decision to divest its product portfolio and focus entirely on telecommunications. Business soon exploded, in part due to Nokia’s mastery in innovating
telecommunications technologies. Nokia was a key developer of new mobile technologies like GSM (Global System
for Mobile Communications) that allow consumers to
roam internationally and use new data services like text
messaging. Although the firm has struggled in North
America—in part because many networks there use a
different wireless standard (CDMA) than in Europe
(GSM)—its global footprint is still impressive.
Nokia’s success also derives from its broad strategic
view of how to build a global brand and international consumer base. The company sells a wide range of products
and services in all price ranges to different types of consumers all over the world. In short, its approach is “All price
points, all markets.” Nokia has a practical understanding of
what consumers need, value, and can afford depending on
their geographical location and demographics. By providing the right products, features, and price, the firm has successfully built long-term brand value all over the world.
With the bulk of industry growth coming from developing markets, Nokia has made sure its cheapest handsets are appealing—and profitable—in markets such as
China, India, and Latin America. On the flip side, to sustain its market leadership and compete in challenging
markets like Europe and the United States, it has
launched a range of high-end handsets with advanced

features and applications. This consumer base is so critical to Nokia’s growth that it has created a business division focused entirely on creating software and services for
it, including music, video, games, maps, messaging, and
media. Today, Nokia’s products range from $30 basic
models to $600 smart phones that include video editing,
voice-guided navigation, and thousands of applications.
Nokia’s future also lies in its growing line of mobile
computers, devices with the advanced capabilities of a
computer that fit into the palm of your hand.
Nokia takes a broad perspective on competition as well,
viewing Apple, Sony, and Canon as threats as much as traditional rivals Motorola and Samsung. Competitors’ products like the iPhone, BlackBerry, and Android smart phones
have all gained significant market share. Although 84 percent
of its sales consist of cell phones, Nokia is focused on making its smart phones durable, reliable, and affordable to consumers in emerging markets, as it did with cell phones.
As a global leader, Nokia understands how critical it is
to have a finger on the pulse of countries and cultures all
over the world. With 16 different R&D factories, manufacturing plants in 10 countries, Web sites in 7 countries, and
650,000 points-of-sale—the widest distribution network
in the world—Nokia strives to be a global leader but locally relevant. It forms relationships with local business
partners, gets involved in the community, and works to
earn consumers’ trust on a local level.
In India, for example, the company has increased its
local involvement by including in the Nokia Music Store a
significant percentage of songs by local and regional
artists, adding thousands of local customer care services,
and supporting a local environmental initiative called
“Planet Ke Rakwale” that encourages consumers to recycle their old phones and batteries. Nokia even added the
tagline, “Made in India for India.”
Today, with a value of nearly $35 billion, Nokia is the
fifth most valuable global brand in the Interbrand/
BusinessWeek ranking, surpassing Google, Samsung,
Apple, and BlackBerry. The brand continues to rank well
in consumers’ minds as high quality, robust, easy to use,
and trustworthy—a perfect combination for succeeding in
both emerging and mature countries.
Questions
1. What have been the keys to Nokia’s global strength?
2. What can Nokia do to gain market share in the United
States and Europe where its presence is not as strong?
3. In the ever-changing world of mobile technology, what
are the greatest threats to Nokia’s global presence?
Sources: Jack Ewing, “Nokia: Lesson Learned, Reward Reaped,” BusinessWeek, July 30, 2007;
“Face Value,” Economist, May 27, 2006; Oli Pekka Kalasvuo, “Brand Identity: A Delicate Balance
between Image and Authenticity,” Economic Times, August 31, 2010; Kevin J. O’Brien, “Nokia Seeks
to Reconnect with the U.S. Market,” New York Times, August 15, 2010; “Best Global Brands 2009,”
Interbrand/BusinessWeek; Nokia Capital Markets Day presentation, 2009; Nokia, www.nokia.com.

TAPPING INTO GLOBAL MARKETS

Marketing Excellence

>>L’Oréal

When it comes to globalizing
beauty, no one does it better than L’Oréal. The company
was founded in Paris over 100 years ago by a young
chemist, Eugene Schueller, who sold his patented hair
dyes to local hairdressers and salons. By the 1930s,
Schueller had invented beauty products like suntan oil
and the first mass-marketed shampoo. Today, the company has evolved into the world’s largest beauty and cosmetics company, with distribution in 130 countries,
23 global brands, and over €17.5 billion in sales.
Much of the company’s international expansion and
success is credited to Sir Lindsay Owen-Jones, who transformed L’Oréal from a small French business to an international cosmetics phenomenon with strategic vision and
precise brand management. During his almost 20 years as
CEO and chairman, Owen-Jones divested weak brands,
invested heavily in product innovation, acquired ethnically
diverse brands, and expanded into markets no one had
dreamed of, including China, South America, and the former Soviet Union. His quest: to achieve diversity, “meet the
needs of men and women around the globe, and make
beauty products available to as many people as possible.”
Today, L’Oréal focuses on its five areas of expertise: skin
care, hair care, makeup, hair coloring, and perfume. Its
brands fall into four different groups: (1) Consumer Products
(52 percent of L’Oréal’s portfolio, including mass-marketed
Maybelline and high-technology products sold at competitive prices through mass-market retailing chains), (2) Luxury
Products (prestigious brands like Ralph Lauren perfume offered only in premium stores, department stores, or specialty
stores), (3) Professional Products (brands such as Redken
designed specifically for professional hair salons), and
(4) Active (dermo-cosmetic products sold at pharmacies).
L’Oréal believes precise target marketing—hitting the
right audience with the right product at the right place—is
crucial to its global success. Owen-Jones explained,

| CHAPTER 21

619

“Each brand is positioned on a very precise [market] segment, which overlaps as little as possible with the others.”
The company has built its portfolio primarily by purchasing local beauty companies all over the world, revamping them with strategic direction, and expanding the brand
into new areas through its powerful marketing arm. For example, L’Oréal instantly became a player (with 20 percent
market share) in the growing ethnic hair care industry when
it purchased and merged the U.S. companies Soft Sheen
Products in 1998 and Carson Products in 2000. L’Oréal
believed the competition had overlooked this category because it was previously fragmented and misunderstood.
SoftSheen-Carson now derives approximately 30 percent
of its annual revenues from South Africa.
L’Oréal also invests money and time in innovating at
14 research centers around the world, spending 3 percent
of annual sales on R&D, more than one percentage point
above the industry average. Understanding the unique
beauty routines and needs of different cultures, countries,
and consumers is critical to L’Oréal’s global success. Hair
and skin greatly differ from one part of the world to another,
so L’Oréal scientists study consumers in laboratory bathrooms and in their own homes, sometimes achieving scientific beauty milestones. In Japan, for example, L’Oréal
developed Wondercurl mascara specially formulated to curl
Asian women’s eyelashes, which are usually short and
straight. The result: within three months it had become
Japan’s number-one selling mascara, and girls excitedly
lined up in front of stores to buy it. L’Oréal continued to research the market and developed nail polish, blush, and
other cosmetics aimed at this new generation of Asian girls.
Well known for its 1973 advertising tagline—“Because
I’m Worth It”—L’Oréal is now a leader in beauty products
around the world. As Gilles Weil, L’Oréal’s head of luxury
products, explained, “You have to be local and as strong
as the best locals, but backed by an international image
and strategy.”
Questions
1. Review L’Oréal’s brand portfolio. What role have
target marketing, smart acquisitions, and R&D played
in growing those brands?
2. Who are L’Oréal’s greatest competitors? Local,
global, or both? Why?
3. What has been the key to successful local product
launches such as Maybelline’s Wondercurl in Japan?
4. What’s next for L’Oréal on a global level? If you were
CEO, how would you sustain the company’s global
leadership?
Sources: Andrew Roberts, “L’Oréal Quarterly Sales Rise Most Since 2007 on Luxury Perfume,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, April 22, 2010; Richard Tomlinson, “L’Oréal’s Global Makeover,”
Fortune, September 30, 2002; Doreen Carvajal, “International Business; Primping for the
Cameras in the Name of Research,” New York Times, February 7, 2006; Richard C. Morais, “The
Color of Beauty,” Forbes, November 27, 2000; L’Oréal, www.loreal.com.

620

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Ch
ap
ter

In This Chapter, We
Will Address the
Following Questions
1. What are important trends in
marketing practices?
2. What are the keys to effective
internal marketing?
3. How can companies be
responsible social marketers?
4. How can a company improve its
marketing skills?
5. What tools are available to help
companies monitor and improve
their marketing activities?

Timberland’s passion for the outdoors
and the environment influences its choice
of products to sell and the way it makes
and sells those products.

22

Managing a Holistic
Marketing Organization
for the Long Run
Healthy long-term growth for a brand requires that the marketing organization
be managed properly. Holistic marketers must engage in a host of carefully planned, interconnected marketing activities and satisfy an increasingly broader set of constituents and objectives.
They must also consider a wider range of effects of their actions. Corporate social responsibility
and sustainability have become a priority as organizations grapple with the short-term and longterm effects of their marketing. Some firms have embraced this new vision of corporate enlightenment and made it the very core of what they do. Consider Timberland.1

Timberland, the maker of rugged boots, shoes, clothing, and gear, has a passion for the
great outdoors. The company targets individuals who live, work, and play outdoors, so it
only makes sense that it wants to do whatever it takes to protect the environment. Over
the past two decades, Timberland’s commitment and actions have blazed trails for green
companies around the world. Its revolutionary initiatives include giving its shoes a
“nutrition label” that measures their “greenness”—how much energy was used in making them, what
transportation and labor costs were incurred, and what portion is renewable. Timberland also introduced a new line of shoes called Earth- Many other brands such as Ben & Jerry’s, Odwalla,
keepers, made of organic cotton, recycled PET, and recycled tires (for the Patagonia, Stonyfield Farm, Whole Foods, and Seventh
soles). The shoes are designed to be taken apart and over 50 percent Generation have embraced similar philosophies and practices.
Successful holistic marketing requires effective relationship
of the parts can be recycled. Timberland has attracted an online commarketing, integrated marketing, internal marketing, and
munity for Earthkeepers by offering tips and information about events
performance marketing. Preceding chapters addressed the
focused on preserving the environment. Its business accomplishments
first two topics and the strategy and tactics of marketing. In
prove that socially and environmentally responsible companies can be this chapter, we consider the latter two topics and how to
successful. Sales topped $1.2 billion in 2009, and Timberland has won conduct marketing responsibly. We look at how firms
numerous awards from a steady spot on Fortune’s 100 Best Companies organize, implement, evaluate, and control marketing
to Work For to the Ron Brown Award for Corporate Leadership, the only activities in a context heightened by social responsibility. We
Presidential Award recognizing companies for outstanding employee begin by examining changes in the way companies conduct
and community relations.
marketing today.

Trends in Marketing Practices
Chapters 1 and Chapter 3 described important changes in the marketing macroenvironment, such
as globalization, deregulation, market fragmentation, consumer empowerment, and environmental
concerns.2 With these and all the remarkable developments in computers, software, the Internet,
and cell phones, the world has unquestionably become a very different place for marketers. In earlier
chapters, we detailed the many shifts in marketing that dominated the first decade of the 21st century.3
Table 22.1 summarizes some important ones and we briefly review a few next.
621

622

PART 8

TABLE 22.1

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Important Shifts in Marketing and Business Practices

• Reengineering. Appointing teams to manage customer-value-building processes and break down walls between departments
• Outsourcing. Buying more goods and services from outside domestic or foreign vendors
• Benchmarking. Studying “best practice companies” to improve performance
• Supplier partnering. Partnering with fewer but better value-adding suppliers
• Customer partnering. Working more closely with customers to add value to their operations
• Merging. Acquiring or merging with firms in the same or complementary industries to gain economies of scale and scope
• Globalizing. Increasing efforts to “think global” and “act local”
• Flattening. Reducing the number of organizational levels to get closer to the customer
• Focusing. Determining the most profitable businesses and customers and focusing on them
• Justifying. Becoming more accountable by measuring, analyzing, and documenting the effects of marketing actions
• Accelerating. Designing the organization and setting up processes to respond more quickly to changes in the environment
• Empowering. Encouraging and empowering personnel to produce more ideas and take more initiative
• Broadening. Factoring the interests of customers, employees, shareholders, and other stakeholders into the activities of the enterprise
• Monitoring. Tracking what is said online and elsewhere and studying customers, competitors, and others to improve business practices

In today’s highly competitive,
ever-changing marketing environment, firms such as Blockbuster
that do not adapt fast enough may
encounter financial setbacks or
even failure.

Recently, marketers have had to operate in a slow-growth economic environment characterized
by discriminating consumers, aggressive competition, and a turbulent marketplace. An era of conspicuous consumption has come to an end as many consumers cope with reduced incomes and less
wealth.4 A debt-laden consumer base penalizes companies still promoting a “buy now, pay later”
sales philosophy, and consumers and companies alike are increasingly considering the environmental and social consequences of their actions.
As consumers become more disciplined in their spending and adopt a “less is more” attitude, it
is incumbent on marketers to create and communicate the true value of their products and services.5
Marketing can and should play a key role in improving standards of living and quality of life, especially in tough times. Marketers must continually seek to improve what they do.6
Companies can’t win by standing still. Recent business problems
and failures by firms such as Blockbuster, Barnes & Noble, and Kodak
reflect an inability to adjust to a dramatically different marketing
environment. Firms must invest instead in improving their offerings
and finding big new ideas. Sometimes, like IBM, Microsoft, and Intel,
they may have to fundamentally change their business models. Marketers must collaborate closely and early with product development
and R&D, and later with the sales force, to develop and sell products
and services that fully satisfy customer needs and wants. They must
also work with finance, manufacturing, and logistics to establish a
value-creation mind-set in the organization.
Emerging markets such as India and China offer enormous new
sources of demand—but often only for certain types of products and
at certain price points. Across all markets, marketing plans and programs will grow more localized and culturally sensitive, while strong
brands that are well differentiated and continually improved will
remain fundamental to marketing success. Businesses will continue to
use social media more and traditional media less. The Web allows unprecedented depth and breadth in communications and distribution,
and its transparency requires companies to be honest and authentic.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

Toyota Prius

Marketers also face ethical dilemmas and perplexing trade-offs. Consumers may value convenience,
but how to justify disposable products or elaborate packaging in a world trying to minimize waste?
Increasing material aspirations can defy the need for sustainability. Given increasing consumer
sensitivity and government regulation, smart companies are creatively designing with energy efficiency,
carbon footprints, toxicity, and disposability in mind. Some are choosing local suppliers over distant
ones. Auto companies and airlines must be particularly conscious of releasing CO2 in the atmosphere.

Toyota Prius Some auto experts scoffed when Toyota predicted sales of 300,000

cars within five years of launching its gas-and-electric Prius hybrid sedan in 2001. But by 2004,
the Prius had a six-month waiting list. Toyota’s winning formula consists of a powerful electric
motor and the ability to quickly switch power sources—resulting in 55 miles per gallon for city
and highway driving—with the roominess and power of a family sedan and an eco-friendly
design and look, for a little over $20,000. The lesson? Functionally successful products that consumers see
as good for the environment can offer enticing options. Toyota is now rolling out hybrids throughout its auto
lineup, and U.S. automakers have followed suit.7
Now more than ever, marketers must think holistically and use creative win-win solutions to balance conflicting demands. They must develop fully integrated marketing programs and meaningful
relationships with a range of constituents.8 They must do all the right things inside their company
and consider the broader consequences in the marketplace, topics we turn to next.

Internal Marketing
Traditionally, marketers played the role of middleman, charged with understanding customers’ needs
and transmitting their voice to various functional areas.9 But in a networked enterprise, every
functional area can interact directly with customers. Marketing no longer has sole ownership of
customer interactions; rather, it now must integrate all the customer-facing processes so customers
see a single face and hear a single voice when they interact with the firm.10
Internal marketing requires that everyone in the organization accept the concepts and goals of
marketing and engage in choosing, providing, and communicating customer value. Only when all
employees realize their job is to create, serve, and satisfy customers does the company become an
effective marketer.11 “Marketing Memo: Characteristics of Company Departments That Are Truly
Customer Driven” presents a tool that evaluates which company departments are truly customer driven.
Let’s look at how marketing departments are being organized, how they can work effectively with
other departments, and how firms can foster a creative marketing culture across the organization.12

Organizing the Marketing Department
Modern marketing departments can be organized in a number of different, sometimes overlapping
ways: functionally, geographically, by product or brand, by market, or in a matrix.

FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION In the most common form of marketing
organization, functional specialists report to a marketing vice president who coordinates their
activities.
Figure 22.1 shows five specialists. Others might include a customer service manager,
|Fig. 22.1|

Marketing
vice president

Marketing
administration
manager

Advertising and
sales promotion
manager

Sales
manager

Functional
Organization
Marketing
research
manager

New-products
manager

623

624

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

marketing

Characteristics of Company Departments
That Are Truly Customer Driven

Memo
R&D

Purchasing

Manufacturing

Marketing

___

They spend time meeting customers and listening to their problems.

___

They welcome the involvement of marketing, manufacturing, and other departments on each new project.

___

They benchmark competitors’ products and seek “best of class” solutions.

___

They solicit customer reactions and suggestions as the project progresses.

___

They continuously improve and refine the product on the basis of market feedback.

___

They proactively search for the best suppliers rather than choose only from those who solicit their business.

___

They build long-term relationships with fewer but more reliable high-quality suppliers.

___

They do not compromise quality for price savings.

___

They invite customers to visit and tour their plants.

___

They visit customer factories to see how customers use the company’s products.

___

They willingly work overtime when it is important to meet promised delivery schedules.

___

They continuously search for ways to produce goods faster and/or at lower costs.

___

They continuously improve product quality, aiming for zero defects.

___

They meet customer requirements for “customization” where this can be done profitably.

___

They study customer needs and wants in well-defined market segments.

___

They allocate marketing effort in relationship to the long-run profit potential of the targeted segments.

___

They develop winning offerings for each target segment.

___

They measure company image and customer satisfaction on a continuous basis.

___

___

They continuously gather and evaluate ideas for new products, product improvements, and services to
meet customers’ needs.
They influence all company departments and employees to be customer-centered in their thinking
and practice.
They acquire specialized knowledge of the customer’s industry.

___

They strive to give the customer “the best solution” but make only promises they can keep.

___

They feed customers’ needs and ideas back to those in charge of product development.

___

They serve the same customers for a long period of time.

___

They set a high standard for service delivery time and meet it consistently.

___

They operate a knowledgeable and friendly customer service department that can answer questions,
handle complaints, and resolve problems in a satisfactory and timely manner.
They prepare periodic profitability reports by product, market segment, sales territory, order size, and
individual customers.
They prepare invoices tailored to customer needs and answer customer queries courteously and quickly.

___
Sales

Logistics

Accounting

___
___

Finance

Public Relations

Other Customer-Contact
Personnel

___
___

They understand and support marketing investments (like image advertising) that produce long-term
customer preference and loyalty.
They tailor the financial package to the customers’ financial requirements.

___

They make quick decisions on customer creditworthiness.

___
___

They disseminate favorable news about the company and they handle damage control for
unfavorable news.
They act as an internal customer and public advocate for better company policies and practices.

___

They are competent, courteous, cheerful, credible, reliable, and responsive.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

625

Some companies employ market
specialists who focus on very
specific regions of the country,
for example, Miami-Dade County
in Florida.

a marketing planning manager, a market logistics manager, a direct marketing manager, and a
digital marketing manager.
The main advantage of a functional marketing organization is its administrative simplicity. It
can be quite a challenge for the department to develop smooth working relationships, however. This
form also can result in inadequate planning as the number of products and markets increases and
each functional group vies for budget and status. The marketing vice president constantly weighs
competing claims and faces a difficult coordination problem.

GEOGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION A company selling in a national market often organizes
its sales force (and sometimes marketing) along geographic lines.13 The national sales manager
may supervise 4 regional sales managers, who each supervise 6 zone managers, who in turn
supervise 8 district sales managers, who each supervise 10 salespeople.
Some companies are adding area market specialists (regional or local marketing managers) to
support sales efforts in high-volume markets. One such market might be Miami-Dade County,
Florida, where almost two-thirds of the households are Hispanic.14 The Miami specialist would
know Miami’s customer and trade makeup, help marketing managers at headquarters adjust their
marketing mix for Miami, and prepare local annual and long-range plans for selling all the company’s
products there. Some companies must develop different marketing programs in different parts of the
country because geography alters their brand development so much.
PRODUCT- OR BRAND-MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION Companies producing a
variety of products and brands often establish a product- (or brand-) management organization.
This does not replace the functional organization but serves as another layer of management.
A group product manager supervises product category managers, who in turn supervise specific
product and brand managers.
A product-management organization makes sense if the company’s products are quite different
or there are more than a functional organization can handle. This form is sometimes characterized
as a hub-and-spoke system. The brand or product manager is figuratively at the center, with spokes
leading to various departments representing working relationships (see
Figure 22.2). The manager may:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Develop a long-range and competitive strategy for the product.
Prepare an annual marketing plan and sales forecast.
Work with advertising and merchandising agencies to develop copy, programs, and campaigns.
Increase support of the product among the sales force and distributors.
Gather continuous intelligence about the product’s performance, customer and dealer attitudes,
and new problems and opportunities.
Initiate product improvements to meet changing market needs.

The product-management organization lets the product manager concentrate on developing a cost-effective marketing program and react more quickly to new products in the

626

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

PART 8

|Fig. 22.2|

The Product
Manager’s
Interactions

Manufacturing
and
distribution

Advertising
agency
Media

Research and
development

Promotion
services

Brand/Product
Manager

Legal

Packaging

Fiscal

Purchasing

Market
research

Publicity
Sales force

PM

marketplace; it also gives the company’s smaller brands a product advocate. However, it has disadvantages too:

APM

•
•
•

PA
(a) Vertical Product Team

•
•

PM

•
R

C

(b) Triangular Product Team

PM
R

C

S

D

F

E

(c) Horizontal Product Team
PM = product manager
APM = associate product manager
PA = product assistant
R = market researcher
C = communication specialist
S = sales manager
D = distribution specialist
F = finance/accounting specialist
E = engineer

|Fig. 22.3|

Three Types of
Product Teams

Product and brand managers may lack authority to carry out their responsibilities.
They become experts in their product area but rarely achieve functional expertise.
The system often proves costly. One person is appointed to manage each major product or
brand, and soon more are appointed to manage even minor products and brands.
Brand managers normally manage a brand for only a short time. Short-term involvement leads
to short-term planning and fails to build long-term strengths.
The fragmentation of markets makes it harder to develop a national strategy. Brand managers
must please regional and local sales groups, transferring power from marketing to sales.
Product and brand managers focus the company on building market share rather than
customer relationships.

A second alternative in a product-management organization is product teams. There are three
types: vertical, triangular, and horizontal (see
Figure 22.3). The triangular and horizontal
product-team approaches let each major brand be run by a brand-asset management team (BAMT)
consisting of key representatives from functions that affect the brand’s performance. The company
consists of several BAMTs that periodically report to a BAMT directors committee, which itself
reports to a chief branding officer. This is quite different from the way brands have traditionally
been handled.
A third alternative is to eliminate product manager positions for minor products and assign
two or more products to each remaining manager. This is feasible where two or more products
appeal to a similar set of needs. A cosmetics company doesn’t need product managers for each
product because cosmetics serve one major need—beauty. A toiletries company needs different
managers for headache remedies, toothpaste, soap, and shampoo because these products differ in
use and appeal.
In a fourth alternative, category management, a company focuses on product categories to manage its brands. Procter & Gamble, a pioneer of the brand-management system, and other top
packaged-goods firms have made a major shift to category management, as have firms outside the
grocery channel.15 P&G cites a number of advantages. By fostering internal competition among
brand managers, the traditional brand-management system created strong incentives to excel, but
also internal competition for resources and a lack of coordination. The new scheme was designed to
ensure adequate resources for all categories.
Another rationale is the increasing power of the retail trade, which has thought of profitability
in terms of product categories. P&G felt it only made sense to deal along similar lines. Retailers and

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

627

regional grocery chains such as Walmart and Dominick’s embrace category management as a means to define a particular product category’s strategic role within the
store and address logistics, the role of private-label products, and the trade-offs between product variety and inefficient duplication.16
In fact, in some packaged-goods firms, category management has evolved into aisle
management and encompasses multiple related categories typically found in the same
sections of supermarkets and grocery stores. General Mills’ Yoplait Yogurt has served
as category advisor to the dairy aisle for 24 major retailers, boosting the yogurt base
footprint four to eight feet at a time and increasing sales of yogurt by 9 percent and
category sales in dairy by 13 percent nationwide.17

MARKET-MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION Canon sells fax machines to
consumer, business, and government markets. Nippon Steel sells to the railroad,
construction, and public utility industries. When customers fall into different user
groups with distinct buying preferences and practices, a market-management
organization is desirable. Market managers supervise several market-development
managers, market specialists, or industry specialists and draw on functional services
as needed. Market managers of important markets might even have functional
specialists reporting to them.
Market managers are staff (not line) people, with duties like those of product managers. They develop long-range and annual plans for their markets and are judged by
their market’s growth and profitability. Because this system organizes marketing
activity to meet the needs of distinct customer groups, it shares many advantages and disadvantages
of product-management systems. Many companies are reorganizing along market lines and becoming market-centered organizations. Xerox converted from geographic selling to selling by industry,
as did IBM and Hewlett-Packard.
When a close relationship is advantageous, such as when customers have diverse and complex
requirements and buy an integrated bundle of products and services, a customer-management
organization, which deals with individual customers rather than the mass market or even market
segments, should prevail.18 One study showed that companies organized by customer groups
reported much higher accountability for the overall quality of relationships and employees’
freedom to take actions to satisfy individual customers.19

MATRIX-MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION Companies that produce many products for
many markets may adopt a matrix organization employing both product and market managers.
The rub is that it’s costly and often creates conflicts. There’s the cost of supporting all the managers,
and questions about where authority and responsibility for marketing activities should reside—at
headquarters or in the division?20 Some corporate marketing groups assist top management with
overall opportunity evaluation, provide divisions with consulting assistance on request, help
divisions that have little or no marketing, and promote the marketing concept throughout
the company.

Relationships with Other Departments
Under the marketing concept, all departments need to “think customer” and work together to satisfy customer needs and expectations. Yet departments define company problems and goals from
their viewpoint, so conflicts of interest and communications problems are unavoidable. The
marketing vice president, or the CMO, must usually work through persuasion rather than through
authority to (1) coordinate the company’s internal marketing activities and (2) coordinate marketing
with finance, operations, and other company functions to serve the customer.21 To help marketing
and other functions jointly determine what is in the company’s best interests, firms can provide joint
seminars, joint committees and liaison employees, employee exchange programs, and analytical
methods to determine the most profitable course of action.22
Many companies now focus on key processes rather than departments, because departmental organization can be a barrier to smooth performance. They appoint process leaders, who
manage cross-disciplinary teams that include marketing and sales people. Marketers thus
may have a solid-line responsibility to their teams and a dotted-line responsibility to the
marketing department.

Marketers of General Mills’
Yoplait Yogurt used category management to help major retailers
gain more profit by reorganizing
their yogurt shelves.

628

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Building a Creative Marketing Organization
Many companies realize they’re not yet really market and customer driven—they are product and
sales driven. Transforming into a true market-driven company requires:
1.
2.
3.

Developing a company-wide passion for customers
Organizing around customer segments instead of products
Understanding customers through qualitative and quantitative research

The task is not easy, but the payoffs can be considerable. It won’t happen as a result of the
CEO making speeches and urging every employee to “think customer.” See “Marketing Insight: The
Marketing CEO” for concrete actions a CEO can take to improve marketing capabilities.
Although it’s necessary to be customer oriented, it’s not enough. The organization must also be
creative.23 Companies today copy each others’ advantages and strategies with increasing speed, making differentiation harder to achieve and lowering margins as firms become more alike. The only
answer is to build a capability in strategic innovation and imagination. This capability comes from
assembling tools, processes, skills, and measures that let the firm generate more and better new ideas
than its competitors.24
Companies must watch trends and be ready to capitalize on them. Motorola was 18 months late
in moving from analog to digital cellular phones, giving Nokia and Ericsson a big lead. Nestlé was

Marketing Insight
The Marketing CEO
What steps can a CEO take to create a market- and customer-focused
company?
1. Convince senior management of the need to become customer
focused. The CEO personally exemplifies strong customer commitment and rewards those in the organization who do likewise.
Former CEOs Jack Welch of GE and Lou Gerstner of IBM were said
to have each spent 100 days a year visiting customers in spite of
their many strategic, financial, and administrative burdens.
2. Appoint a senior marketing officer and marketing task force.
The marketing task force should include the CEO, the vice presidents of sales, R&D, purchasing, manufacturing, finance, and
human resources, and other key individuals.
3. Get outside help and guidance. Consulting firms have considerable experience helping companies adopt a marketing orientation.
4. Change the company’s reward measurement and system. As
long as purchasing and manufacturing are rewarded for keeping costs
low, they will resist accepting some costs required to serve customers
better. As long as finance focuses on short-term profit, it will oppose
major investments designed to build satisfied, loyal customers.
5. Hire strong marketing talent. The company needs a strong
marketing vice president who not only manages the marketing

department but also gains respect from and influence with the other
vice presidents. A multidivisional company will benefit from establishing a strong corporate marketing department.
6. Develop strong in-house marketing training programs. The
company should design well-crafted marketing training programs
for corporate management, divisional general managers, marketing and sales personnel, manufacturing personnel, R&D personnel,
and others. GE, Motorola, and Accenture run such programs.
7. Install a modern marketing planning system. The planning
format will require managers to think about the marketing environment, opportunities, competitive trends, and other forces.
These managers then prepare strategies and sales-and-profit
forecasts for specific products and segments and are accountable for performance.
8. Establish an annual marketing excellence recognition program.
Business units that believe they’ve developed exemplary marketing
plans should submit a description of their plans and results. Winning
teams should be rewarded at a special ceremony and the plans disseminated to the other business units as “models of marketing
thinking.” Becton, Dickinson and Company; Procter & Gamble; and
SABMiller follow this strategy.
9. Shift from a department focus to a process-outcome focus.
After defining the fundamental business processes that determine its success, the company should appoint process leaders
and cross-disciplinary teams to reengineer and implement these
processes.
10. Empower the employees. Progressive companies encourage and
reward their employees for coming up with new ideas and empower
them to settle customer complaints to save the customer’s business. IBM lets frontline employees spend up to $5,000 to solve a
customer problem on the spot.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

late seeing the trend toward coffeehouses such as Starbucks. Coca-Cola was slow to pick up beverage trends toward fruit-flavored drinks such as Snapple, energy drinks such as Gatorade, and designer
water brands. Market leaders can miss trends when they are risk averse, obsessed about protecting
their existing markets and physical resources, and more interested in efficiency than innovation.25

Socially Responsible Marketing

Walmart

Effective internal marketing must be matched by a strong sense of ethics, values, and social responsibility.26 A number of forces are driving companies to practice a higher level of corporate social
responsibility, such as rising customer expectations, evolving employee goals and ambitions, tighter
government legislation and pressure, investor interest in social criteria, media scrutiny, and changing
business procurement practices.27
Virtually all firms have decided to take a more active, strategic role in corporate social responsibility, carefully scrutinizing what they believe in and how they should treat their customers, employees,
competitors, community, and the environment. Taking this broader stakeholder view is believed to
also benefit another important constituency—shareholders. Look at how Walmart is addressing
corporate social responsibility.28

Walmart In 2005, Walmart ex-CEO Lee Scott said, “We thought we could sit in

Bentonville [Arkansas], take care of customers, take care of associates—and the world would
leave us alone. It doesn’t work that way anymore.” Determined to become more environmentally
friendly, Scott vowed that the company would invest $500 million in sustainability projects, such
as doubling the efficiency of its vehicle fleet over the next ten years, eliminating 30 percent
of the energy used in stores, and reducing solid waste from U.S. stores by 25 percent in three years. Little
decisions can make big differences for the retail giant. By eliminating excess packaging on its Kid Connection
private-label toys, the company saved 3,800 trees and 1 million barrels of oil, along with an estimated
$2.4 million a year in shipping costs. It redirected more than 57 percent of the waste generated by stores and
Sam’s Club facilities to recycling centers instead of landfills, and it enlisted long-time environmentalist and
Patagonia founder Yvon Chouinard to provide insight and advice. Major environmental groups have been
pleased, but Walmart still faces criticism from union leaders and liberal activists about its wage rates, employee
health care, gender discrimination, and treatment of local competition. The company has responded by citing
progress in each area, such as the fact that it created approximately 63,000 jobs around the world in 2008,
including more than 33,000 in the United States.
Businesses have not always believed in the value of social responsibility. In 1776, Adam Smith
proclaimed, “I have never known much good done by those who profess to trade for the public
good.” Legendary economist Milton Friedman famously declared social initiatives “fundamentally
subversive” because he felt they undermined the profit-seeking purpose of public companies and
wasted shareholders’ money. Some critics worry that important business investment in areas such
as R&D could suffer as a result of a focus on social responsibility.29
But these critics are in a tiny minority. Many now believe that satisfying customers, employees,
and other stakeholders and achieving business success are closely tied to the adoption and implementation of high standards of business and marketing conduct. A further benefit of being seen as
socially responsible is the ability to attract employees, especially younger people who want to work
for companies they feel good about.
The most admired—and most successful—companies in the world abide by a code of serving
people’s interests, not only their own. Procter & Gamble’s new CEO Bob McDonald has made “brand
purpose” a key component of the company’s marketing strategies, noting: “Consumers have a higher
expectation of brands and want to know what they are doing for the world. But it has to be authentic with a genuine desire to do it.” Downy fabric softener’s “Touch of Comfort” cause program, for
example, donates 5 cents from purchases to Quilts for Kids, an organization that works with volunteer quilters to make and distribute custom-sewn quilts to children in hospitals.30 P&G is not alone,
as the following demonstrates.

| CHAPTER 22

629

630

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Firms of
Endearment

Downy fabric softener’s “Touch of
Comfort” cause marketing program donated thousand of blankets
to hospitalized children.

Firms of Endearment Researchers Raj Sisodia, David Wolfe, and Jag

Sheth believe humanistic companies make great companies. They see “Firms of Endearment”
as those with a culture of caring that serve the interests of their stakeholders, defined by the
acronym SPICE: Society, Partners, Investors, Customers, and Employees. Sisodia et al. believe
Firms of Endearment create a love affair with stakeholders. Their senior managers run an opendoor policy, are passionate about customers, and earn modest compensation. They pay more to their
employees, relate more closely to a smaller group of excellent suppliers, and give back to the communities
in which they work. The researchers assert that Firms of Endearment actually spend less on marketing as
a percentage of sales yet earn greater profits, because customers who love the company do most of the
marketing. The authors see the 21st-century marketing paradigm as creating value for all stakeholders and
becoming a beloved firm.
Table 22.2 lists firms receiving top marks as Firms of Endearment from a
sample of thousands of customers, employees, and suppliers.31

Corporate Social Responsibility

Stonyfield
Farm

Raising the level of socially responsible marketing calls for making a three-pronged attack that
relies on proper legal, ethical, and social responsibility behavior. One company that puts social
responsible marketing squarely at the center of all it does is Stonyfield Farm.32

Stonyfield Farm

As Chapter 1 described, social responsibility is at the foundation of Stonyfield Farm. The company was cofounded in 1983 by long-time “CE-Yo” Gary
Hirshberg on the belief that there was a business opportunity in selling organic dairy products
while “restoring the environment.” The global market leader in organic yogurt, Stonyfield works

TABLE 22.2
Best Buy
Commerce Bank
Google
IKEA
L.L.Bean
REI
Toyota
Whole Foods

Top Firms of Endearment
BMW
Container Store
Harley-Davidson
JetBlue
New Balance
Southwest
Trader Joe’s

CarMax
Costco
Honda
Johnson & Johnson
Patagonia
Starbucks
UPS

Caterpillar
eBay
IDEO
Jordan’s Furniture
Progressive Insurance
Timberland
Wegmans

Source: Raj Sisodia, David B. Wolfe, and Jag Sheth, Firms of Endearment: How World-Class Companies Profit from Passion and
Purpose (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2007), p. 16, © 2007. Printed and electronically reproduced by permission
of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

with socially responsible suppliers, adopts environmentally friendly manufacturing practices, and uses
packaging to promote its views on environmental and health issues. Stonyfield donates 10 percent of
profits “to efforts that help protect and restore the Earth” and has launched a nonprofit foundation called
“Climate Counts.” Progressive business practices have not hurt its financial performance. Stonyfield is
the number three yogurt brand in the United States, and it now also sells smoothies, milk, frozen yogurt,
and ice cream.

LEGAL BEHAVIOR Organizations must ensure every employee knows and observes
relevant laws.33 For example, it’s illegal for salespeople to lie to consumers or mislead them
about the advantages of buying a product. Salespeople may not offer bribes to purchasing
agents or others influencing a B2B sale. Their statements must match advertising claims, and
they may not obtain or use competitors’ technical or trade secrets through bribery or
industrial espionage. Finally, they must not disparage competitors or their products by
suggesting things that are not true. Managers must make sure every sales representative knows
the law and acts accordingly.
ETHICAL BEHAVIOR Business practices come under attack because business situations
routinely pose ethical dilemmas: It’s not easy to draw a clear line between normal marketing
practice and unethical behavior. Some issues sharply divide critics. Though Kraft chose to stop
advertising some of its less healthy products such as Oreos and Chips Ahoy! on television programs
targeted to children ages 6 to 11, some watch groups felt that was not enough.34
Of course certain business practices are clearly unethical or illegal. These include bribery, theft
of trade secrets, false and deceptive advertising, exclusive dealing and tying agreements, quality or
safety defects, false warranties, inaccurate labeling, price-fixing or undue discrimination, and barriers to entry and predatory competition.
Companies must adopt and disseminate a written code of ethics, build a company tradition
of ethical behavior, and hold their people fully responsible for observing ethical and legal guidelines.35 In the past, a disgruntled customer might bad-mouth an unethical or poorly performing firm to 12 other people; today, via the Internet, he or she can reach thousands. Microsoft,
for example, has attracted scores of anti-Microsoft sites, including www.msboycott.com
and www.ihatemicrosoft.com. The general distrust of companies among U.S. consumers is
evident in research showing the percentage who view corporations unfavorably has reached
26 percent.36

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY BEHAVIOR Individual marketers must exercise their social
conscience in specific dealings with customers and stakeholders. Some top-rated companies for
corporate social responsibility are Microsoft, Johnson & Johnson, 3M, Google, Coca-Cola, General
Mills, UPS, Sony, and Procter & Gamble.37
Increasingly, people want information about a company’s record on social and environmental responsibility to help them decide which companies to buy from, invest in, and work for.38
H. J. Heinz received awards for its 108-page 2009 Corporate Social Responsibility report, which
reflects the company’s commitment to “achieving sustainable growth that benefits our shareholders, consumers, customers, employees and communities, guided by the principles of
integrity, transparency and social responsibility.”
Table 22.3 contains the opening words of
that report.
Communicating corporate social responsibility can be a challenge. Once a firm touts an environmental initiative, it can become a target for criticism. Many well-intentioned product or marketing
initiatives can have unforeseen or unavoidable negative consequences.39

Nestlé Palm oil was hailed as a renewable fuel for food companies looking to find
a solution to a trans-fat ban, until its use was linked to the destruction of tropical rain
forests and the extinction of the orangutan and the sun bear. When Greenpeace released
a report criticizing Nestlé for purchasing palm oil for its KitKat candy bars from an Indonesian firm linked to rain forest destruction there, a social media war ensued. Protestors
posted a negative video on YouTube, bombarded Twitter and Nestlé’s Facebook page, and took to the

| CHAPTER 22

631

632

PART 8

TABLE 22.3

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Excerpt from the H. J. Heinz 2009 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

Message from Chairman, President and CEO
Making a Difference for People and the Planet
The H. J. Heinz Company has been a good corporate citizen for 140 years. Throughout the Company’s history, it has made a positive social
and economic impact in the community and pursuing sustainable business practices. . . .
In Fiscal Years 2008 and 2009, Heinz delivered record sales, higher earnings per share and dividend growth for our shareholders while staying
true to the principles that have guided our Company since 1869—Quality, Integrity, Innovation and Food Safety.
At the same time, we expanded our strong commitment to environmental responsibility by launching a global initiative across six continents
that aims to achieve a 20% reduction in our greenhouse gas emissions, water and energy consumption, and solid waste by 2015.
Our Company has been working to achieve transparency and sustainability ever since Henry John Heinz started selling horseradish, his first
product, in clear glass bottles so consumers could see its wholesome purity. . . .
Heinz has a strong and independent Board of Directors and a Global Code of Conduct, Global Operating Principles and Supplier Guiding
Principles that set high ethical standards for our employees and suppliers.
Most importantly, Heinz is a global company that values people, their dignity and their rights, in the workplace and in the community. We
empower our diverse workforce of approximately 33,000 men and women to make a sustainable difference on the job and in their communities
and we foster a workplace culture where competitive wages, safety, fairness and respect are the pillars of our success.
Finally, as one of the world’s premier food companies, Heinz is dedicated to enhancing the health and wellness of men, women and children
around the world. . . .
The Heinz Micronutrient Campaign is combating the global problem of iron-deficiency anemia and malnutrition among infants and children. The
campaign has provided nutritional supplements to almost three million children in 15 developing nations and it is expanding to other countries
to help many more children in the years to come.
Our Company has invested millions in the Heinz Micronutrient Campaign to ensure a sustainable future for people and our planet.
I invite you to learn more about Heinz, our performance and our progress by visiting the Social, Environment and Economic sections of this interactive
Web-based report, where you will find comprehensive facts and data, videos and photos, and links to other informative Heinz documents.
Thank you for your interest in Heinz.
Sincerely,
William R. Johnson
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
Source: Excerpt from the H. J. Heinz 2009 Corporate Social Responsibility Report.

streets outside Nestlé’s Jakarta offices. Nestlé cut ties with the firm
and took other steps to address the controversy but continued to receive criticism.

In Indonesia, Greenpeace activists’
dramatic protests drew attention to
the environmental effects of
Nestlé’s manufacturing of products such as KitKat candy bars.

Often, the more committed a company is to sustainability and
environmental protection, the more dilemmas that can arise.
Vermont-based Green Mountain Coffee Roasters prides itself on sustainability efforts that have, in part, helped the firm become one of
the fastest-selling coffee brands around. Then its 2006 purchase of
Kuerig and its popular single-cup brewing system posed a quandary:
The K-Cups used with the Kuerig brewing system were made of totally
nonrecyclable plastic and foil. Given its environmental heritage and
beliefs, Green Mountain Coffee saw only one course of action, and it
has been engaged in extensive R&D to find a more environmentally
sound solution.40
Corporate philanthropy also can pose dilemmas. Merck, DuPont, Walmart, and Bank of
America have each donated $100 million or more to charities in a year. Yet good deeds can be
overlooked—even resented—if the company is seen as exploitive or fails to live up to a “good
guys” image. Philip Morris Company’s $250 million ad campaign touting its charitable activities

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

633

was met with skepticism because of its negative image as a tobacco company. Some critics worry
that cause marketing or “consumption philanthropy” may replace virtuous actions with lessthoughtful buying, reduce emphasis on real solutions, or deflect attention from the fact that markets may create many social problems to begin with.41

SUSTAINABILITY Sustainability—the ability to meet humanity’s needs without harming future
generations—now tops many corporate agendas. Major corporations outline in great detail how
they are trying to improve the long-term impact of their actions on communities and the
environment. As one sustainability consultant put it, “There is a triple bottom line—people, planet,
and profit—and the people part of the equation must come first. Sustainability means more than
being eco-friendly, it also means you are in it for the long haul.”42
Sustainability ratings exist, but there is no consistent agreement about what metrics are
appropriate.43 One comprehensive study used 11 factors to evaluate and assemble a list of the Top
100 Sustainable Corporations in the World: energy, water, CO2, and waste productivity; leadership diversity; CEO-to-average-worker pay; taxes paid; sustainability leadership; sustainability
pay link; innovation capacity; and transparency. The top 5 firms were GE, PG&E, TNT, H&M,
and Nokia.44
Some feel companies that score well on sustainability typically exhibit high-quality management in that “they tend to be more strategically nimble and better equipped to compete in
the complex, high-velocity, global environment.”45 Consumer interest is also creating market
opportunities. Clorox’s line of naturally derived Green Works laundry and home cleaners—
aided by restrained price premiums and a Sierra Club endorsement—has experienced early
success.46 Another good example is organic products (see “Marketing Insight: The Rise of
Organic”).
Heightened interest in sustainability has also unfortunately resulted in greenwashing, which gives
products the appearance of being environmentally friendly without living up to that promise. One
study revealed that half the labels on allegedly green products focus on an eco-friendly benefit (such
as recycled content) while omitting information about significant environmental drawbacks (such
as manufacturing intensity or transportation costs).47
Because of insincere firms jumping on the green bandwagon, consumers bring a healthy skepticism to environmental claims, but they are also unwilling to sacrifice product performance and
quality.48 Many firms are rising to the challenge and are using the need for sustainability to fuel

Marketing Insight
The Rise of Organic
Organic products have become a strong presence in many food and beverage categories. Caster & Pollux’s success with organic and natural pet
foods led to its distribution in major specialty retail chains such as Petco.
All-organic Honest Tea grew 50 percent a year after its founding in 1998;
the firm sold 40 percent of the business to Coca-Cola in 2008.
Organic and natural are at the core of some brands’ positioning.
Chipotle Mexican Grill’s mission statement, “Food with Integrity,” reflects its focus on good food with a socially responsible message. One

of the first fast-casual restaurant chains, Chipotle uses natural and
organic ingredients and serves more naturally raised meat than
any other restaurant. Making each burrito by hand takes time, but the
quality of the food and the message behind it are a satisfying payoff for
many customers.
Many companies beyond the food industry are embracing organic
offerings that avoid chemicals and pesticides to stress ecological preservation. Apparel and other nonfood items make up the second-fastest
growth category of the $3.5 billion organic product industry. Organic nonfood grew 9.1 percent in 2009 to $1.8 billion—now 7 percent of the
$26.6 billion organic products industry. Organic cotton grown by farmers who fight boll weevils with ladybugs, weed crops by hand, and use
manure for fertilizer has become a hot product at retail.
Sources: “Industry Statistics and Projected Growth,” Organic Trade Association,
June 2010; Jessica Shambora, “The Honest Tea Guys Look Back,” Fortune,
July 26, 2010; Arianne Cohen, “Ode to a Burrito,” Fast Company, April 2008,
pp. 54–56; Kenneth Hein, “The World on a Platter,” Brandweek, April 23, 2007,
pp. 27–28; Megan Johnston, “Hard Sell for a Soft Fabric,” Forbes, October 30,
2006, pp. 73–80.

634

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

innovation. Sales of products emphasizing sustainability remained strong through the recent
economic recession.49

Socially Responsible Business Models
The future holds a wealth of opportunities, yet forces in the socioeconomic, cultural, and natural
environments will impose new limits on marketing and business practices. Companies that innovate
solutions and values in a socially responsible way are most likely to succeed.50
Companies such as The Body Shop, Working Assets, and Smith & Hawken are giving social
responsibility a more prominent role. Late actor Paul Newman’s homemade salad dressing has grown
to a huge business. Newman’s Own brand also includes pasta sauce, salsa, popcorn, and lemonade
sold in 15 countries. The company has given away all its profits and royalties after tax—almost
$300 million so far—to educational and charitable programs such as the Hole in the Wall Gang
camps Newman created for children with serious illnesses.51
Corporate philanthropy as a whole is on the rise: After years of steady growth, with $14.1 billion
in cash and in-kind support given in 2009, it held fairly steady even during a recession.52 In addition to these contributions, more firms are coming to believe corporate social responsibility in the
form of cause marketing and employee volunteerism programs are not just the “right thing” but
also the “smart thing to do.”53

Cause-Related Marketing
Many firms blend corporate social responsibility initiatives with marketing activities.54 Causerelated marketing links the firm’s contributions to a designated cause to customers’ engaging directly
or indirectly in revenue-producing transactions with the firm.55 Cause marketing is part of corporate
societal marketing (CSM), which Minette Drumwright and Patrick Murphy define as marketing
efforts “that have at least one noneconomic objective related to social welfare and use the resources
of the company and/or of its partners.”56 Drumwright and Murphy also include traditional and
strategic philanthropy and volunteerism in CSM.
Table 22.4 summarizes three award-winning and highly successful cause marketing programs. We next review pros and cons of such programs and some important guidelines.

TABLE 22.4

Three Classic Cause Marketing Programs

Tesco
Tesco, a leading UK retailer, has created a “Tesco for Schools and Clubs” program that dovetails well with its overall corporate brand positioning
of “Every Little Bit Helps.” Customers receive one voucher for every £10 spent, which they can donate to a school of their choice or any
registered amateur club for children under 18. In 2009, the company gave away 540,000 items worth £13.4 million. It also offers vouchers
for recycled inkjet cartridges and donated working phones.
Dawn
Procter & Gamble’s Dawn, the top dishwashing liquid in the United States, has long highlighted its unusual side benefit—it can clean birds
caught in oil spills. A report by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service called Dawn “the only bird-cleaning agent that is recommended because it
removes oil from feathers; is non-toxic; and does not leave a residue.” A Web site launched in 2006, www.DawnSavesWildlife.com, drew
130,000 people who formed virtual groups to encourage friends and others to stop gas and oil leaks from their cars. After the catastrophic
BP oil spill in 2010, P&G donated thousands of bottles as well as placing a code on bottles and donating $1 to Gulf wildlife causes for each
code customers activated, eventually totaling $500,000. The brand also drew massive publicity and visits to its Facebook site, which outlined
the environmental cleanup and relief effort.
British Airways
British Airways developed a cause-marketing campaign called “Change for Good” to encourage its passengers to help by donating the foreign
currency left over from their travels to UNICEF. The airline advertised its program during an in-flight video, on the backs of seat cards, and with
in-flight announcements. It also developed a television ad that featured a child thanking British Airways for its contribution to UNICEF. Because
Change for Good directly targeted passengers, it did not require extensive advertising or promotion and was highly cost-efficient. It produced
immediate results, and over a 15-year period from 1994 to 2009, it distributed almost $45 million around the world.
Sources: www.tescoforschoolsandclubs.co.uk; www.dawnsaveswildlife.com; www.britishairways.com; Jack Neff and Stephanie Thompson, “Eco-Marketing Has Staying Power This Time Around,”
Advertising Age, April 30, 2007, p. 55.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

635

CAUSE-MARKETING BENEFITS AND COSTS A successful

KFC

cause-marketing program can improve social welfare, create
differentiated brand positioning, build strong consumer bonds,
enhance the company’s public image, create a reservoir of goodwill,
boost internal morale and galvanize employees, drive sales, and
increase the firm’s market value.57 Consumers may develop a strong,
unique bond with the firm that transcends normal marketplace
transactions.
Specifically, from a branding point of view, cause marketing can
(1) build brand awareness, (2) enhance brand image, (3) establish
brand credibility, (4) evoke brand feelings, (5) create a sense of brand
community, and (6) elicit brand engagement.58 It has a particularly
interested audience in civic-minded 18- to 24-year-old Millennial
consumers (see
Table 22.5).
Cause-related marketing could backfire, however, if consumers
question the link between the product and the cause or see the firm
as self-serving and exploitive.59 Problems can also arise if consumers
do not think a company is consistent and sufficiently responsible in
all its behavior, as happened to KFC.60

KFC KFC’s “Buckets for the Cure” program was to donate 50 cents for every $5

“pink” bucket of fried chicken purchased over a one-month period to the famed Susan
G. Komen for the Cure Foundation. It was slotted to be the single biggest corporate donation ever to fund breast cancer research—over $8.5 million. One problem: At virtually the
same time, KFC also launched its Double Down sandwich with two pieces of fried chicken,
bacon, and cheese. Critics immediately pointed out that KFC was selling a food item with excessively
high calories, fat, and sodium that contributed to obesity, a significant risk factor for breast cancer. On
the Susan G. Komen site itself, being overweight was flagged for increasing the risk of breast cancer
by 30 percent to 60 percent in postmenopausal women, also leaving the foundation open to criticism
over the partnership.
To avoid backlash, some firms take a soft-sell approach to their cause efforts. Nike’s alliance with
the Lance Armstrong Foundation for cancer research sold over 80 million yellow LIVESTRONG
bracelets for $1 from 2004 to 2010, but intentionally the famed Nike swoosh was nowhere to be
seen.61 One interesting recent cause program is the PRODUCT(RED) campaign.62

TABLE 22.5

Millennial Data Points: 18- to 24-Year-Olds’ Attitudes
about Causes

85% are likely to switch from one brand to another brand that is about the same in price and quality,
if the other brand is associated with a good cause.
86% consider a company’s social or environmental commitments when deciding which products and
services to recommend to others.
84% consider a company’s social or environmental commitments when deciding what to buy or where
to shop.
87% consider a company’s social or environmental commitments when deciding where to work.
86% say when a product or company supports a cause (a social or environmental issue) they care
about, they have a more positive image of that product or company.
Source: 2010 Cone Cause Evolution Study; for additional content, see www.coneinc.com/2010-cone-cause-evolution-study.

The double meaning in British
Airways “Change for Good” cause
marketing program cleverly highlighted how the program worked
and the benefits it created.

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

(RED)

636

PRODUCT(RED) The highly publicized launch of PRODUCT

(RED) in 2006, championed by U2 singer and activist Bono and Bobby Shriver,
chairman of DATA, raised awareness and money for The Global Fund by teaming with some of the world’s most iconic branded products—American Express
cards, Motorola phones, Converse sneakers, Gap T-shirts, Apple iPods, and
Emporio Armani sunglasses—to produce (RED)-branded products. Up to 50 percent of the
profits from sales of these products go to The Global Fund to help women and children
affected by HIV/AIDS in Africa. Each company that becomes PRODUCT(RED) places its logo
in the “embrace” signified by the parentheses and is “elevated to the power of red.” Although
some critics felt the PRODUCT(RED) project was overmarketed, in its first 18 months its contribution to The Global Fund surpassed $36 million, more than seven times what businesses
had contributed since the fund’s founding in 2002. Many well-known brands have joined the
cause since then, such as Dell computers, Hallmark cards, and Starbucks coffee.

Nike deliberately downplays its
role in cause marketing programs,
such as Lance Armstrong
Foundation’s LIVESTRONG
bracelets.

The knowledge, skills, and resources of a top firm may be even more important to
a nonprofit or community group than funding. Nonprofits must be clear about what
their goals are, communicate clearly what they hope to accomplish, and devise an
organizational structure to work with different firms. Developing a long-term
relationship with a firm can take time. As one consultant noted, “What’s often a
problem between corporations and nonprofits is different expectations and different
understanding about the amount of time everything will take.”63
Firms must make a number of decisions in designing and implementing a causemarketing program, such as how many and which cause(s) to choose and how to brand the cause
program.

DESIGNING A CAUSE PROGRAM Some experts believe the positive impact of causerelated marketing is reduced by sporadic involvement with numerous causes. Cathy Chizauskas,
Gillette’s director of civic affairs, states: “When you’re spreading out your giving in fifty-dollar to
one-thousand-dollar increments, no one knows what you are doing. . . . It doesn’t make much of a
splash.”64
Many companies focus on one or a few main causes to simplify execution and maximize impact.
McDonald’s Ronald McDonald Houses in 30-plus countries offer more than 7,200 rooms each night
to families needing support while their child is in the hospital, saving them a total of $257 million annually in hotel costs. The program has provided a “home away from home” for nearly 10 million family members since 1974.65
Limiting support to a single cause, however, may limit the pool of consumers or other stakeholders who can transfer positive feelings from the cause to the firm. Many popular causes also already
have numerous corporate sponsors. Over 300 companies, including Avon, Ford, Estée Lauder,
Revlon, Lee Jeans, Polo Ralph Lauren, Yoplait, Saks, BMW, and American Express, have associated
themselves with breast cancer as a cause.66 Thus a brand may find itself overlooked in a sea of symbolic pink ribbons.
Opportunities may be greater with “orphan causes”—diseases that afflict fewer than 200,000 people.67
Another option is overlooked diseases; pancreatic cancer is the fourth-deadliest form of cancer
behind skin, lung, and breast yet has received little or no corporate support. Even major killers such
as prostate cancer for men and heart disease for women have been relatively neglected compared to
breast cancer, but some firms have begun to fill the void. Gillette and Grolsch beer have joined
longtime supporters Safeway and Major League Baseball in the fight against prostate cancer. The
American Heart Association launched a “Go Red for Women” program with a red dress symbol to
heighten awareness and attract interest from corporations and others to a disease that kills roughly
12 times more women than breast cancer each year.68
Most firms choose causes that fit their corporate or brand image and matter to their employees
and shareholders. LensCrafters’ Give the Gift of Sight program—now rebranded as OneSight after
the company was purchased by the Italian firm Luxottica—is a family of charitable vision-care programs providing free vision screenings, eye exams, and glasses to more than 6 million needy people

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

637

marketing

Memo

Making a Difference: Top 10 Tips for Cause Branding

Cone, a Boston-based strategic communications agency specializing in cause
branding and corporate responsibility, offers these tips for developing
authentic and substantive programs:
1. Select a focus area that aligns with your mission, goals and organization.
2. Evaluate your institutional “will” and resources. If you, your employees
and other allies don’t believe or invest in your organization’s cause, neither will your audience.
3. Analyze your competitors’ cause positioning. There are few remaining
wide, open spaces, but this may help you locate a legitimate societal
need or an untapped element within a more crowded space that you
can own.
4. Choose your partners carefully. Look for alignment in values, mission and
will. Carefully outline roles and responsibilities. Set your sights on a multiyear sustainable relationship, with annual measurement of accomplishments for both partners.
5. Don’t underestimate the name of your program—it’s key to the identity
of your campaign. Develop a few words that say exactly what you do and
create a visual identity that is simple, yet memorable. The Avon Breast
Cancer Crusade, American Heart Association’s Go Red for Women and
Target Take Charge of Education are good examples.
6. To create a sustainable and effective program, start by developing a
cross-functional strategy team. Include representatives from the office

of the CEO, public affairs, human resources, marketing, public and
community relations, research/measurement, volunteer and program
management, among others. If you’re in silos, you will spend too much
valuable time building bridges to other departments to get the real
work done.
7. Leverage both your assets and those of your partner(s) to bring the
program to life. Assets may include volunteers, cash and in-kind
donations, special events, in store presence, partner resources and
marketing/advertising support. And remember, emotion is one of your
greatest assets. It can help you to connect with your audience and
differentiate your organization in a crowded marketplace.
8. Communicate through every possible channel. Craft compelling words
and visuals because stirring images can penetrate the heart. Then, take
your messages beyond traditional media outlets and become multidimensional! Think special events, Web sites, workshops, PSAs, expert
spokespersons and even celebrity endorsements.
9. Go local. National programs reach the “grass tops,” but true transformation begins at the grassroots. Engage citizens/volunteers through handson activities at local events, cause promotions and fundraisers.
10. Innovate. True cause leaders constantly evolve their programs to add
energy, new engagement opportunities and content to remain relevant
and to build sustainability.

Sources: Cone, “Top 10 Tips for Cause Branding,” www.coneinc.com/10-tips-cause-branding; See also, Carol L. Cone, Mark A. Feldman, and Alison T. DaSilva, “Cause and
Effects,” Harvard Business Review (July 2003): 95–101.

in North America and developing countries around the world. All stores are empowered to deliver
free glasses in their communities, and two traveling Vision Vans target children in North America and
make monthly two-week optical missions overseas. Luxottica pays most of the overhead, so 92 percent
of all donations go directly to fund programming.69
Another good cause fit is Barnum’s Animal Crackers, which launched a campaign to raise awareness of endangered species and help protect the Asian tiger.“Marketing Memo: Making a Difference”
provides some tips from a top cause-marketing firm. Here is an example of a new firm using cause
marketing to successfully build a new business.70

TOMS Shoes Although Blake Mycoskie did not win the around-the-world reality show Amazing Race as a contestant, his return trip to Argentina in 2006 sparked a desire
to start a business to help the scores of kids he saw who suffered for one simple reason—they
lacked shoes. Shoeless children incur a health risk but are also disadvantaged in that they
often are not permitted to go to school. Thus was born TOMS shoes, its name chosen to convey “a better tomorrow,” with a pledge to donate a pair of shoes to needy children for each pair of shoes
sold. Picked up by stores like Whole Foods, Nordstrom, and Neiman Marcus and also sold online, TOMS
shoes are based on the classic alpargata footwear of Argentina. As a result of the company’s One for One
program, the lightweight shoes can also be found on the feet of more than 1 million kids in developing
countries such as Argentina and Ethiopia. Using money that would have been used to fund promotional
efforts to instead pay for donated shoes has been good marketing too: The firm has garnered heaps of

638

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

publicity—AT&T even featured Mycoskie in a commercial—and sales
revenue for the first five years of the firm’s existence has been estimated
at $50 million.

Social Marketing

These two Argentinean children
are wearing shoes donated by
TOMS as the result of customer
purchases of two pairs of its classic
alpargata footwear.

Cause-related marketing supports a cause. Social marketing by nonprofit or government organizations furthers a cause, such as “say no to
drugs” or “exercise more and eat better.”71
Social marketing goes back many years. In the 1950s, India started
family planning campaigns. In the 1970s, Sweden introduced social
marketing campaigns to turn itself into a nation of nonsmokers and
nondrinkers, the Australian government ran “Wear Your Seat Belt”
campaigns, and the Canadian government launched campaigns to
“Say No to Drugs,” “Stop Smoking,” and “Exercise for Health.” In the
1980s, the World Bank, World Health Organization, and Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention started to use the term social marketing and promote interest in it. Some notable global social marketing
successes are:
•
•
•
•

Oral rehydration therapy in Honduras significantly decreased deaths from diarrhea in children
under five.
Social marketers created booths in marketplaces where Ugandan midwives sold contraceptives
at affordable prices.
Population Communication Services created and promoted two extremely popular songs in
Latin America, “Stop” and “When We Are Together,” to help young women “say no.”
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute successfully raised awareness about cholesterol
and high blood pressure, which helped significantly reduce deaths.

Different types of organizations conduct social marketing in the United States. Government agencies include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Departments of Health, Social, and
Human Services, Department of Transportation, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
The literally hundreds of nonprofit organizations that conduct social marketing include the
American Red Cross, the United Way, and the American Cancer Society.
Choosing the right goal or objective for a social marketing program is critical. Should a familyplanning campaign focus on abstinence or birth control? Should a campaign to fight air pollution
focus on ride-sharing or mass transit? Social marketing campaigns may try to change people’s
cognitions, values, actions, or behaviors. The following examples illustrate the range of possible
objectives.
Cognitive campaigns
•
•

Explain the nutritional values of different foods.
Demonstrate the importance of conservation.

Action campaigns
•
•
•
•

Attract people for mass immunization.
Motivate people to vote “yes” on a certain issue.
Inspire people to donate blood.
Motivate women to take a pap test.

Behavioral campaigns
•
•
•

Demotivate cigarette smoking.
Demotivate use of hard drugs.
Demotivate excessive alcohol consumption.

Value campaigns
•
•

Alter ideas about abortion.
Change attitudes of bigoted people.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

TABLE 22.6

| CHAPTER 22

639

The Social Marketing Planning Process

Where Are We?
• Determine program focus.
• Identify campaign purpose.
• Conduct an analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT).
• Review past and similar efforts.
Where Do We Want to Go?
• Select target audiences.
• Set objectives and goals.
• Analyze target audiences and the competition.
How Will We Get There?
• Product: Design the market offering.
• Price: Manage costs of behavior change.
• Distribution: Make the product available.
• Communications: Create messages and choose media.
How Will We Stay on Course?
• Develop a plan for evaluation and monitoring.
• Establish budgets and find funding sources.
• Complete an implementation plan.
While social marketing uses a number of different tactics to achieve
its goals, the planning process follows many of the same steps as for traditional products and services (see
Table 22.6).72 Some key success
73
factors for changing behavior include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Choose target markets that are most ready to respond.
Promote a single, doable behavior in clear, simple terms.
Explain the benefits in compelling terms.
Make it easy to adopt the behavior.
Develop attention-grabbing messages and media.
Consider an education-entertainment approach.

One organization that has accomplished most of these goals through
the application of modern marketing practices is the World Wildlife
Foundation.

World Wildlife Foundation

The
World Wildlife Foundation (WWF) consists of 30 independent
World Wildlife organizations around the globe that once
operated separately. Its early achievements include helping to
form the Forest Stewardship Council in 1993 and cofounding
the Marine Stewardship Council with Unilever in 1996. In the United
States, its annual budget does not allow for lavish marketing expenditures,
so the WWF relies primarily on extensive, creative direct marketing
campaigns to bring its message to the public and solicit contributions.
One recent mailing offered recipients a chance to win one of several trips,
including an African safari and an Alaskan cruise, in a sweepstakes.
WWF has an award-winning Web site, and it also earns revenue through
different types of corporate partnerships with top firms such as Goldman
Sachs, Tiffany’s, IKEA, Nike, Johnson & Johnson, Cargill, Dole, adidas, Walmart, IBM, and Tyco.
Since 1985, the WWF Network has invested over $1.165 billion in more than 11,000 projects in
130 countries.

The World Wildlife Fund uses
modern marketing communications and programs to actively
support its cause.

640

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Social marketing programs are complex; they take time and may require phased programs or
actions. You may recall the many steps in discouraging smoking: release of cancer reports, labeling
of cigarettes as harmful, bans on cigarette advertising, education about secondary smoke effects,
bans on smoking in restaurants and planes, increased taxes on cigarettes to pay for antismoking
campaigns, and states’ suits against tobacco companies.
Social marketing organizations should evaluate program success in terms of their objectives.
Criteria might include incidence of adoption, speed of adoption, continuance of adoption, low cost
per unit of adoption, and absence of counterproductive consequences.

Marketing Implementation
and Control
Table 22.7 summarizes the characteristics of a great marketing company, great not for what it is
but for what it does. Great marketing companies know the best marketers thoughtfully and creatively devise marketing plans and then bring them to life. Marketing implementation and control
are critical to making sure marketing plans have their intended results year after year.

Marketing Implementation
Marketing implementation is the process that turns marketing plans into action assignments and
ensures they accomplish the plan’s stated objectives.74 A brilliant strategic marketing plan counts
for little if not implemented properly. Strategy addresses the what and why of marketing activities;
implementation addresses the who, where, when, and how. They are closely related: One layer of
strategy implies certain tactical implementation assignments at a lower level. For example, top
management’s strategic decision to “harvest” a product must be translated into specific actions and
assignments.
Companies today are striving to make their marketing operations more efficient and their return on marketing investment more measurable (see Chapter 4). Marketing costs can amount to as
much as a quarter of a company’s total operating budget. Marketers need better templates for
marketing processes, better management of marketing assets, and better allocation of marketing
resources.
Marketing resource management (MRM) software provides a set of Web-based applications
that automate and integrate project management, campaign management, budget management,
asset management, brand management, customer relationship management, and knowledge

TABLE 22.7

Characteristics of a Great Marketing Company

• The company selects target markets in which it enjoys superior advantages and exits or avoids
markets where it is intrinsically weak.
• Virtually all the company’s employees and departments are customer- and market-minded.
• There is a good working relationship between marketing, R&D, and manufacturing.
• There is a good working relationship between marketing, sales, and customer service.
• The company has installed incentives designed to lead to the right behaviors.
• The company continuously builds and tracks customer satisfaction and loyalty.
• The company manages a value delivery system in partnership with strong suppliers and distributors.
• The company is skilled in building its brand name(s) and image.
• The company is flexible in meeting customers’ varying requirements.

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

641

TABLE 22.8

Types of Marketing Control

Type of Control

Prime Responsibility

Purpose of Control

Approaches

I. Annual-plan control

Top management
Middle management

To examine whether the planned results
are being achieved

•
•
•
•
•

II. Profitability control

Marketing controller

To examine where the company is making
and losing money

Profitability by:
• product
• territory
• customer
• segment
• trade channel
• order size

III. Efficiency control

Line and staff
management
Marketing controller

To evaluate and improve the spending efficiency
and impact of marketing expenditures

Efficiency of:
• sales force
• advertising
• sales promotion
• distribution

IV. Strategic control

Top management
Marketing auditor

To examine whether the company is pursuing
its best opportunities with respect to markets,
products, and channels

• Marketing effectiveness rating
instrument
• Marketing audit
• Marketing excellence review
• Company ethical and social
responsibility review

management. The knowledge management component consists of process templates, how-to wizards, and best practices. Software packages can provide what some have called desktop marketing, giving marketers information and decision structures on computer dashboards. MRM software lets
marketers improve spending and investment decisions, bring new products to market more quickly,
and reduce decision time and costs.

Marketing Control
Marketing control is the process by which firms assess the effects of their marketing activities and
programs and make necessary changes and adjustments.
Table 22.8 lists four types of needed
marketing control: annual-plan control, profitability control, efficiency control, and strategic control.

Annual-Plan Control
Annual-plan control ensures the company achieves the sales, profits, and other goals established in
its annual plan. At its heart is management by objectives (see
Figure 22.4). First, management
sets monthly or quarterly goals. Second, it monitors performance in the marketplace. Third, management determines the causes of serious performance deviations. Fourth, it takes corrective action
to close gaps between goals and performance.
This control model applies to all levels of the organization. Top management sets annual sales and
profit goals; each product manager, regional district manager, sales manager, and sales rep is
committed to attaining specified levels of sales and costs. Each period, top management reviews and

Sales analysis
Market share analysis
Sales-to-expense ratios
Financial analysis
Market-based scorecard
analysis

642

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Goal Setting

What do
we want
to achieve?

interprets the results. Marketers today have better marketing metrics for measuring the performance
of marketing plans (see
Table 22.9 for some samples).75 Four tools for the purpose are sales
analysis, market share analysis, marketing expense-to-sales analysis, and financial analysis. The
chapter appendix outlines them in detail.

Performance
Measurement

What is
happening?

Profitability Control

Performance
Diagnosis

Corrective
Action

Why
is it
happening?

What should
we do about
it?

|Fig. 22.4|

The Control Process

Companies should measure the profitability of their products, territories, customer groups,
segments, trade channels, and order sizes to help determine whether to expand, reduce, or eliminate
any products or marketing activities. The chapter appendix shows how to conduct and interpret a
marketing profitability analysis.

Efficiency Control
Suppose a profitability analysis reveals the company is earning poor profits in certain products,
territories, or markets. Are there more efficient ways to manage the sales force, advertising, sales
promotion, and distribution?
Some companies have established a marketing controller position to work out of the controller’s office but specialize in improving marketing efficiency. General Foods, DuPont, and
Johnson & Johnson perform a sophisticated financial analysis of marketing expenditures and
results. Their marketing controllers examine adherence to profit plans, help prepare brand managers’ budgets, measure the efficiency of promotions, analyze media production costs, evaluate
customer and geographic profitability, and educate marketing staff on the financial implications
of marketing decisions.76

TABLE 22.9

Marketing Metrics

Sales Metrics
• Sales growth
• Market share
• Sales from new products
Customer Readiness to Buy Metrics
• Awareness
• Preference
• Purchase intention
• Trial rate
• Repurchase rate
Customer Metrics
• Customer complaints
• Customer satisfaction
• Ratio of promoters to detractors
• Customer acquisition costs
• New-customer gains
• Customer losses
• Customer churn
• Retention rate
• Customer lifetime value
• Customer equity
• Customer profitability
• Return on customer

Distribution Metrics
• Number of outlets
• Share in shops handling
• Weighted distribution
• Distribution gains
• Average stock volume (value)
• Stock cover in days
• Out of stock frequency
• Share of shelf
• Average sales per point of sale
Communication Metrics
• Spontaneous (unaided) brand awareness
• Top of mind brand awareness
• Prompted (aided) brand awareness
• Spontaneous (unaided) advertising awareness
• Prompted (aided) advertising awareness
• Effective reach
• Effective frequency
• Gross rating points (GRP)
• Response rate

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

643

Strategic Control
Each company should periodically reassess its strategic approach to the marketplace
with a good marketing audit. Companies can also perform marketing excellence
reviews and ethical/social responsibility reviews.

THE MARKETING AUDIT The average U.S. corporation loses half its
customers in five years, half its employees in four years, and half its investors in less
than one year. Clearly, this points to some weaknesses. Companies that discover
weaknesses should undertake a thorough study known as a marketing audit.77
A marketing audit is a comprehensive, systematic, independent, and periodic
examination of a company’s or business unit’s marketing environment, objectives,
strategies, and activities, with a view to determining problem areas and opportunities
and recommending a plan of action to improve the company’s marketing performance.
Let’s examine the marketing audit’s four characteristics:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Comprehensive—The marketing audit covers all the major marketing activities
of a business, not just a few trouble spots as in a functional audit. Although
functional audits are useful, they sometimes mislead management. Excessive
sales force turnover, for example, could be a symptom not of poor sales-force
training or compensation but of weak company products and promotion. A
comprehensive marketing audit usually is more effective in locating the real
source of problems.
Systematic—The marketing audit is an orderly examination of the organization’s
macro- and micromarketing environments, marketing objectives and strategies,
marketing systems, and specific activities. It identifies the most-needed improvements and incorporates them into a corrective-action plan with short- and longrun steps.
Independent— Self-audits, in which managers rate their own operations, lack
objectivity and independence.78 The 3M Company has made good use of a corporate auditing office, which provides marketing audit services to divisions on request.79 Usually, however, outside consultants bring the necessary objectivity, broad experience in a number
of industries, familiarity with the industry being audited, and undivided time and attention.
Periodic—Firms typically initiate marketing audits only after failing to review their marketing
operations during good times, with resulting problems. A periodic marketing audit can benefit companies in good health as well as those in trouble.

A marketing audit starts with agreement between the company officer(s) and the marketing
auditor(s) on the audit’s objectives and time frame, and a detailed plan of who is to be asked what
questions. The cardinal rule for marketing auditors is: Don’t rely solely on company managers for
data and opinions. Ask customers, dealers, and other outside groups. Many companies don’t really
know how their customers and dealers see them, nor do they fully understand customer needs.
The marketing audit examines six major components of the company’s marketing situation.
Table 22.10 lists the major questions.

THE MARKETING EXCELLENCE REVIEW The three columns in
Table 22.11
distinguish among poor, good, and excellent business and marketing practices. The profile
management creates from indicating where it thinks the business stands on each line can highlight
where changes could help the firm become a truly outstanding player in the marketplace.

The Future of Marketing
Top management recognizes that marketing requires more accountability than in the past.
“Marketing Memo: Major Marketing Weaknesses” summarizes companies’ major deficiencies in
marketing, and how to find and correct them.
To succeed in the future, marketing must be more holistic and less departmental. Marketers must
achieve larger influence in the company, continuously create new ideas, and strive for customer insight by treating customers differently but appropriately. They must build their brands more through

Johnson & Johnson, maker of a
famous baby powder, conducts
careful analysis of its marketing
expenditures and results.

644

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

TABLE 22.10

Components of a Marketing Audit

Part I. Marketing Environment Audit
Macroenvironment
A. Demographic

What major demographic developments and trends pose opportunities or threats to this company? What actions
have the company taken in response to these developments and trends?

B. Economic

What major developments in income, prices, savings, and credit will affect the company? What actions have the
company been taking in response to these developments and trends?

C. Environmental

What is the outlook for the cost and availability of natural resources and energy needed by the company? What
concerns have been expressed about the company’s role in pollution and conservation, and what steps have the
company taken?

D. Technological

What major changes are occurring in product and process technology? What is the company’s position in these
technologies? What major generic substitutes might replace this product?

E. Political

What changes in laws and regulations might affect marketing strategy and tactics? What is happening in the
areas of pollution control, equal employment opportunity, product safety, advertising, price control, and so forth
that affects marketing strategy?

F. Cultural

What is the public’s attitude toward business and toward the company’s products? What changes in customer
lifestyles and values might affect the company?

Task Environment
A. Markets

What is happening to market size, growth, geographical distribution, and profits? What are the major market segments?

B. Customers

What are the customers’ needs and buying processes? How do customers and prospects rate the company and
its competitors on reputation, product quality, service, sales force, and price? How do different customer
segments make their buying decisions?

C. Competitors

Who are the major competitors? What are their objectives, strategies, strengths, weaknesses, sizes, and market
shares? What trends will affect future competition and substitutes for the company’s products?

D. Distribution and Dealers

What are the main trade channels for bringing products to customers? What are the efficiency levels and growth
potentials of the different trade channels?

E. Suppliers

What is the outlook for the availability of key resources used in production? What trends are occurring among suppliers?

F. Facilitators and Marketing
Firms

What is the cost and availability outlook for transportation services, warehousing facilities, and financial
resources? How effective are the company’s advertising agencies and marketing research firms?

G. Publics

Which publics represent particular opportunities or problems for the company? What steps has the company
taken to deal effectively with each public?

Part II. Marketing Strategy Audit
A. Business Mission

Is the business mission clearly stated in market-oriented terms? Is it feasible?

B. Marketing Objectives and
Goals

Are the company and marketing objectives and goals stated clearly enough to guide marketing planning and
performance measurement? Are the marketing objectives appropriate, given the company’s competitive position,
resources, and opportunities?

C. Strategy

Has the management articulated a clear marketing strategy for achieving its marketing objectives? Is the
strategy convincing? Is the strategy appropriate to the stage of the product life cycle, competitors’ strategies,
and the state of the economy? Is the company using the best basis for market segmentation? Does it have clear
criteria for rating the segments and choosing the best ones? Has it developed accurate profiles of each target
segment? Has the company developed an effective positioning and marketing mix for each target segment? Are
marketing resources allocated optimally to the major elements of the marketing mix? Are enough resources or
too many resources budgeted to accomplish the marketing objectives?

Part III. Marketing Organization Audit
A. Formal Structure

Does the marketing vice president or CMO have adequate authority and responsibility for company activities
that affect customers’ satisfaction? Are the marketing activities optimally structured along functional, product,
segment, end user, and geographical lines?

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

TABLE 22.10

| CHAPTER 22

645

(Continued)

B. Functional Efficiency

Are there good communication and working relations between marketing and sales? Is the product-management
system working effectively? Are product managers able to plan profits or only sales volume? Are there any groups
in marketing that need more training, motivation, supervision, or evaluation?

C. Interface Efficiency

Are there any problems between marketing and manufacturing, R&D, purchasing, finance, accounting, and/or
legal that need attention?

Part IV. Marketing Systems Audit
A. Marketing Information
System

Is the marketing information system producing accurate, sufficient, and timely information about marketplace
developments with respect to customers, prospects, distributors and dealers, competitors, suppliers, and various
publics? Are company decision makers asking for enough marketing research, and are they using the results?
Is the company employing the best methods for market measurement and sales forecasting?

B. Marketing Planning
System

Is the marketing planning system well conceived and effectively used? Do marketers have decision support
systems available? Does the planning system result in acceptable sales targets and quotas?

C. Marketing Control
System

Are the control procedures adequate to ensure that the annual-plan objectives are being achieved? Does
management periodically analyze the profitability of products, markets, territories, and channels of distribution?
Are marketing costs and productivity periodically examined?

D. New-Product
Development System

Is the company well organized to gather, generate, and screen new-product ideas? Does the company do
adequate concept research and business analysis before investing in new ideas? Does the company carry
out adequate product and market testing before launching new products?

Part V. Marketing Proaductivity Audit
A. Profitability Analysis

What is the profitability of the company’s different products, markets, territories, and channels of distribution?
Should the company enter, expand, contract, or withdraw from any business segments?

B. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Do any marketing activities seem to have excessive costs? Can cost-reducing steps be taken?
Part VI. Marketing Function Audits
A. Products

What are the company’s product line objectives? Are they sound? Is the current product line meeting the
objectives? Should the product line be stretched or contracted upward, downward, or both ways? Which products
should be phased out? Which products should be added? What are the buyers’ knowledge and attitudes toward
the company’s and competitors’ product quality, features, styling, brand names, and so on? What areas of product
and brand strategy need improvement?

B. Price

What are the company’s pricing objectives, policies, strategies, and procedures? To what extent are prices set on
cost, demand, and competitive criteria? Do the customers see the company’s prices as being in line with the
value of its offer? What does management know about the price elasticity of demand, experience-curve effects,
and competitors’ prices and pricing policies? To what extent are price policies compatible with the needs of
distributors and dealers, suppliers, and government regulation?

C. Distribution

What are the company’s distribution objectives and strategies? Is there adequate market coverage and service?
How effective are distributors, dealers, manufacturers’ representatives, brokers, agents, and others? Should the
company consider changing its distribution channels?

D. Marketing Communications What are the organization’s advertising objectives? Are they sound? Is the right amount being spent on
advertising? Are the ad themes and copy effective? What do customers and the public think about the
advertising? Are the advertising media well chosen? Is the internal advertising staff adequate? Is the sales
promotion budget adequate? Is there effective and sufficient use of sales promotion tools such as samples,
coupons, displays, and sales contests? Is the public relations staff competent and creative? Is the company
making enough use of direct, online, and database marketing?
E. Sales Force

What are the sales force’s objectives? Is the sales force large enough to accomplish the company’s objectives?
Is the sales force organized along the proper principles of specialization (territory, market, product)? Are there
enough (or too many) sales managers to guide the field sales representatives? Do the sales compensation level
and structure provide adequate incentive and reward? Does the sales force show high morale, ability, and effort?
Are the procedures adequate for setting quotas and evaluating performance? How does the company’s sales force
compare to competitors’ sales forces?

646

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

TABLE 22.11

The Marketing Excellence Review: Best Practices

Poor

Good

Excellent

Product driven

Market driven

Market driving

Mass-market oriented

Segment-oriented

Niche-oriented and customer-oriented

Product offer

Augmented product offer

Customer solutions offer

Average product quality

Better than average

Legendary

Average service quality

Better than average

Legendary

End-product oriented

Core-product oriented

Core-competency oriented

Function oriented

Process oriented

Outcome oriented

Reacting to competitors

Benchmarking competitors

Leapfrogging competitors

Supplier exploitation

Supplier preference

Supplier partnership

Dealer exploitation

Dealer support

Dealer partnership

Price driven

Quality driven

Value driven

Average speed

Better than average

Legendary

Hierarchy

Network

Teamwork

Vertically integrated

Flattened organization

Strategic alliances

Stockholder driven

Stakeholder driven

Societally driven

performance than promotion. They must go electronic and win through building superior information and communication systems.
The coming years will see:
•
•
•
•
•

The demise of the marketing department and the rise of holistic marketing
The demise of free-spending marketing and the rise of ROI marketing
The demise of marketing intuition and the rise of marketing science
The demise of manual marketing and the rise of both automated and creative marketing
The demise of mass marketing and the rise of precision marketing

To accomplish these changes and become truly holistic, marketers need a new set of skills and
competencies in:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Customer relationship management (CRM)
Partner relationship management (PRM)
Database marketing and data mining
Contact center management and telemarketing
Public relations marketing (including event and sponsorship marketing)
Brand-building and brand-asset management
Experiential marketing
Integrated marketing communications
Profitability analysis by segment, customer, and channel

The benefits of successful 21st-century marketing are many, but they will come only with hard
work, insight, and inspiration. New rules and practices are emerging, and it is an exciting time. The
words of 19th-century U.S. author Ralph Waldo Emerson may never have been more true: “This
time like all times is a good one, if we but know what to do with it.”

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

647

marketing

Memo

Major Marketing Weaknesses

A number of “deadly sins” signal that the marketing program is in trouble.
Here are 10 deadly sins, the signs, and some solutions.

Deadly Sin: The company’s marketing planning process is deficient.

Deadly Sin: The company is not sufficiently market focused and
customer driven.

components, there is no way to estimate the financial implications
of different strategies, and there is no contingency planning.
Solutions: Establish a standard format including situational analysis,
SWOT, major issues, objectives, strategy, tactics, budgets, and controls; ask marketers what changes they would make if they were
given 20 percent more or less budget; and run an annual marketing
awards program with prizes for best plans and performance.

Signs: There is evidence of poor identification of market segments,

poor prioritization of market segments, no market segment managers, employees who think it is the job of marketing and sales to
serve customers, no training program to create a customer culture,
and no incentives to treat the customer especially well.
Solutions: Use more advanced segmentation techniques, prioritize
segments, specialize the sales force, develop a clear hierarchy of
company values, foster more “customer consciousness” in employees and company agents, and make it easy for customers to reach
the company and respond quickly to any communication.
Deadly Sin: The company does not fully understand its target
customers.

Signs: The latest study of customers is three years old; customers

are not buying your product like they once did; competitors’ products are selling better; and there is a high level of customer returns
and complaints.
Solutions: Do more sophisticated consumer research, use more analytical techniques, establish customer and dealer panels, use customer relationship software, and do data mining.
Deadly Sin: The company needs to better define and monitor its
competitors.

Signs: The company focuses on near competitors, misses distant

competitors and disruptive technologies, and has no system for
gathering and distributing competitive intelligence.
Solutions: Establish an office for competitive intelligence, hire
competitors’ people, watch for technology that might affect the
company, and prepare offerings like those of competitors.
Deadly Sin: The company does not properly manage relationships
with stakeholders.

Signs: Employees, dealers, and investors are not happy; and good

suppliers do not come.
Solutions: Move from zero-sum thinking to positive-sum thinking;

and do a better job of managing employees, supplier relations,
distributors, dealers, and investors.
Deadly Sin: The company is not good at finding new opportunities.

Signs: The company has not identified any exciting new opportuni-

ties for years, and the new ideas the company has launched have
largely failed.
Solutions: Set up a system for stimulating the flow of new ideas.

Signs: The marketing plan format does not have the right

Deadly Sin: Product and service policies need tightening.

Signs: There are too many products and many are losing money;

the company is giving away too many services; and the company is
poor at cross-selling products and services.
Solutions: Establish a system to track weak products and fix or drop
them; offer and price services at different levels; and improve
processes for cross-selling and up-selling.
Deadly Sin: The company’s brand-building and communications
skills are weak.

Signs: The target market does not know much about the company;

the brand is not seen as distinctive; the company allocates its
budget to the same marketing tools in about the same proportion
each year; and there is little evaluation of the ROI impact of
promotions.
Solutions: Improve brand-building strategies and measurement of
results; shift money into effective marketing instruments; and
require marketers to estimate the ROI impact in advance of
funding requests.
Deadly Sin: The company is not organized for effective and
efficient marketing.

Signs: Staff lacks 21st-century marketing skills, and there are bad
vibes between marketing/sales and other departments.
Solutions: Appoint a strong leader and build new skills in the
marketing department, and improve relationships between
marketing and other departments.
Deadly Sin: The company has not made maximum use of
technology.

Signs: There is evidence of minimal use of the Internet, an outdated

sales automation system, no market automation, no decision-support
models, and no marketing dashboards.
Solutions: Use the Internet more, improve the sales automation
system, apply market automation to routine decisions, and develop
formal marketing decision models and marketing dashboards.

Source: Philip Kotler, Ten Deadly Marketing Sins: Signs and Solutions (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004). © Philip Kotler.

648

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Summary
1. The modern marketing department has evolved through
the years from a simple sales department to an organizational structure where marketers work mainly on
cross-disciplinary teams.
2. Some companies are organized by functional specialization; others focus on geography and regionalization,
product and brand management, or market-segment
management. Some companies establish a matrix
organization consisting of both product and market
managers.
3. Effective modern marketing organizations are marked by
customer focus within and strong cooperation among
marketing, R&D, engineering, purchasing, manufacturing,
operations, finance, accounting, and credit.
4. Companies must practice social responsibility through
their legal, ethical, and social words and actions. Cause
marketing can be a means for companies to productively
link social responsibility to consumer marketing programs.
Social marketing is done by a nonprofit or government organization to directly address a social problem or cause.

5. A brilliant strategic marketing plan counts for little unless
implemented properly, including recognizing and diagnosing a problem, assessing where the problem exists,
and evaluating results.
6. The marketing department must monitor and control
marketing activities continuously. Marketing plan control
ensures the company achieves the sales, profits, and
other goals in its annual plan. The main tools are sales
analysis, market share analysis, marketing expense-tosales analysis, and financial analysis of the marketing plan.
Profitability control measures and controls the profitability
of products, territories, customer groups, trade channels,
and order sizes. Efficiency control finds ways to increase
the efficiency of the sales force, advertising, sales promotion, and distribution. Strategic control periodically
reassesses the company’s strategic approach to the
marketplace using marketing effectiveness and marketing excellence reviews, as well as marketing audits.
7. Achieving marketing excellence in the future will require
a new set of skills and competencies.

Applications
Marketing Debate
Is Marketing Management an Art
or a Science?
Some observers maintain that good marketing is mostly an
art and does not lend itself to rigorous analysis and deliberation. Others contend it is a highly disciplined enterprise that
shares much with other business disciplines.
Take a position: Marketing management is largely an
artistic exercise and therefore highly subjective versus
Marketing management is largely a scientific exercise
with well-established guidelines and criteria.

Marketing Excellence

>>Starbucks
Starbucks opened in Seattle in 1971 at a time when coffee
consumption in the United States had been declining for a
decade and rival brands used cheaper coffee beans to compete on price. Starbucks’s founders decided to experiment
with a new concept: a store that would sell only the finest
imported coffee beans and coffee-brewing equipment. (The
original store didn’t sell coffee by the cup, only beans.)
Howard Schultz came to Starbucks in 1982. While in
Milan on business, he had walked into an Italian coffee bar

Marketing Discussion
Cause Marketing
How does cause or corporate societal marketing affect your
personal consumer behavior? Do you ever buy or not buy
any products or services from a company because of its environmental policies or programs? Why or why not?

and had an epiphany: “There was nothing like this in America. It was an extension of people’s front porch. It was an
emotional experience.” To bring this concept to the United
States, Schultz set about creating an environment for Starbucks coffeehouses that would reflect Italian elegance
melded with U.S. informality. He envisioned Starbucks as
a “personal treat” for its customers, a “Third Place”—a
comfortable, sociable gathering spot bridging the workplace and home.
Starbucks’s expansion throughout the United States
was carefully planned. All stores were company-owned and
operated, ensuring complete control over an unparalleled
image of quality. In a “hub” strategy, coffeehouses entered a

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

| CHAPTER 22

649

donated 5 cents from every sale of its Ethos bottled water
to improving the quality of water in poor countries, part of
a five-year, $10 million pledge.
Ethical Sourcing: Starbucks has partnered with Conservation International to ensure that coffee it purchases is not
only of the highest quality but also “responsibly grown and
ethically traded.” Starbucks is the world’s biggest buyer of
fair-trade coffee and pays an average of 23 percent above
market price for 40 million pounds a year. It works continuously with farmers on responsible methods such as planting trees along rivers and using shade-growing techniques
to help preserve forests.

new market in a clustered group. Although this
deliberate saturation often cannibalized 30 percent of one
store’s sales by introducing a store nearby, any drop in revenue was offset by efficiencies in marketing and distribution
costs, and the enhanced image of convenience. A typical
customer would stop by Starbucks 18 times a month. No
U.S. retailer has had a higher frequency of customer visits.
Part of Starbucks’s success undoubtedly lies in its products and services, and its relentless commitment to providing the richest possible sensory experiences. But another
key is its enlightened sense of responsibility, manifested in a
number of different ways. Schultz believed that to exceed
customers’ expectations it is first necessary to exceed employees’. Since 1990, Starbucks has provided comprehensive health care to all employees, including part-timers.
Health insurance now costs the company more each year
than coffee. A stock option plan called Bean Stock allows
employees also to participate in its financial success.
Schultz also believed Starbucks’s operations should
run in a respectful, ethical manner, making decisions with
a positive impact on communities and the planet.
Community: The Starbucks Foundation, created in 1997 with
proceeds from the sale of Schultz’s book, aims to “create
hope, discovery, and opportunity in communities where Starbucks partners [employees] live and work.” Its primary focus
is supporting literacy programs for children and families in the
United States and Canada; expanded, it has now donated
millions of dollars to charities and communities worldwide.
Starbucks’s employees volunteer community service
hours for causes big and small—such as rebuilding New
Orleans after Hurricane Katrina—and wants to have employees and customers volunteering over 1 million community service hours each year by the end of 2015. As
described in the chapter, Starbucks is also a partner in
PRODUCT(RED), an initiative to help fight and stop the
spread of HIV in Africa, and so far has donated enough
money to purchase 14 million days of medicine. It has also

The Environment: It took Starbucks 10 years of development to create the world’s first recycled beverage cup
made of 10 percent postconsumer fiber, conserving 5 million pounds of paper or approximately 78,000 trees a year.
Now the team is working to ensure that customers recycle.
Jim Hanna, Starbucks’s director of environmental impact,
explained, “[Starbucks] defines a recyclable cup not by what
the cup is made out of but by our customers actually having access to recycling services.” Starbucks’s goal: make
100 percent of its cups recycled or reused by 2015. The
firm also emphasizes energy and water conservation and
building green, LEED-certified buildings around the world.
Howard Schultz stepped down as CEO in 2000 but
returned as CEO, president, and chairman in 2008 to help
restore growth and excitement to the powerhouse chain.
Today, Starbucks has over 16,700 stores worldwide,
approximately 142,000 employees, $9.8 billion in revenue,
and plans to expand worldwide. To achieve its international
growth goals, Schultz believes Starbucks must retain a
passion for coffee and a sense of humanity, to remain small
even as it gets big, and to be a responsible company.
Questions
1. Starbucks has worked hard to act ethically and responsibly. Has it done a good job communicating its
efforts to consumers? Do consumers believe Starbucks is a responsible company? Why or why not?
2. Where does a company like Starbucks draw the line on
supporting socially responsible programs? For example,
how much of its annual budget should go toward these
programs? How much time should employees focus on
them? Which programs should it support?
3. How do you measure the results of Starbucks’s socially responsible programs?
Sources: Howard Schultz, “Dare to Be a Social Entrepreneur,” Business 2.0, December 2006, p. 87;
Edward Iwata, “Owner of Small Coffee Shop Takes on Java Titan Starbucks,” USA Today, December 20,
2006; “Staying Pure: Howard Schultz’s Formula for Starbucks,” Economist, February 25, 2006, p. 72;
Diane Anderson, “Evolution of the Eco Cup,” Business 2.0, June 2006, p. 50; Bruce Horovitz, “Starbucks
Nation,” USA Today, May 19, 2006; Theresa Howard, “Starbucks Takes Up Cause for Safe Drinking
Water,” USA Today, August 2, 2005; Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang, Pour Your Heart into It:
How Starbucks Built a Company One Cup at a Time (New York: Hyperion, 1997); “At MIT-Starbucks
Symposium, Focus on Holistic Approach to Recycling,” MIT, www.mit.edu, May 12, 2010; Starbucks.

650

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Marketing Excellence

>>Virgin Group
Virgin roared onto
the British stage in
the 1970s with the
innovative Virgin
Records, brainchild
of Richard Branson, who signed
unknown artists
and began a
marathon of publicity that continues to this day.
The flamboyant
Branson sold
Virgin Records (to
Thorn-EMI for
nearly $1 billion
in 1992) but
went on to
create
over
200 companies worldwide whose
combined revenues exceeded €11.5 billion (about
$16.2 billion) in 2009.
The Virgin name—the third most respected brand in
Britain—and the Branson personality help to sell such
diverse products and services as planes, trains, finance,
soft drinks, music, mobile phones, cars, wine, publishing,
and even bridal wear. Branson can create interest in almost
any business he wants by simply attaching the “Virgin”
name to it. He supplies the brand and a small initial investment and takes a majority control, and big-name partners
come up with the cash.
The Virgin Group looks for new opportunities in markets with underserved, overcharged customers and complacent competition. Branson explained, “Wherever we
find them, there is a clear opportunity area for Virgin to do
a much better job than the competition. We introduce
trust, innovation, and customer friendliness where they
don’t exist.”
Some marketing and financial critics point out that
Branson is diluting the brand, that it covers too many businesses. There have been some fumbles: Virgin Cola,
Virgin Cosmetics, and Virgin Vodka have all but disappeared.
But despite the diversity, all the lines connote value for
money, quality, innovation, fun, and a sense of competitive
challenge. And then Virgin’s vaunted marketing expertise
kicks in.

A master of the strategic publicity stunt, Branson knew
photographers have a job to do and they’d turn up at his
events if he gave them a good reason. He took on stodgy,
overpriced British Airways by wearing World War I–era flying gear to announce the formation of Virgin Atlantic in
1984. The first Virgin flight took off laden with celebrities
and media and equipped with a brass band, waiters from
Maxim’s in white tie and tails, and free-flowing champagne.
The airborne party enjoyed international press coverage
and millions of dollars’ worth of free publicity.
When Branson launched Virgin Cola in the United
States in 1998, he steered an army tank down Fifth
Avenue in New York, garnering interviews on each of the
network morning TV shows. In 2002, he plunged into
Times Square from a crane to announce his mobile phone
business. In 2004, introducing a line of hip techie gadgets
called Virgin Pulse, Branson again took center stage,
appearing at a New York City nightclub wearing a pair
of flesh-colored tights and a strategically placed portable
CD player.
Although he eschews traditional market research for a
“screw it, let’s do it” attitude, Branson stays in touch
through constant customer contact. When he first set up
Virgin Atlantic, he called 50 customers every month to chat
and get their feedback. He appeared in airports to rub
elbows with customers, and if a plane was delayed, he
handed out gift certificates to a Virgin Megastore or discounts on future travel.
A nonprofit foundation called Virgin Unite has started
to tackle global, social, and environmental problems with
an entrepreneurial approach. A team of scientists, entrepreneurs, and environmental enthusiasts consult with
Virgin about what it needs to do on a grassroots and global
level. The goal is to change the way “businesses and the
social sector work together—driving business as a force
for good.”
Clearly, Branson cares about Virgin’s customers and
the impact his companies have on people and the planet.
That’s why he recently made corporate responsibility and
sustainable development (CR/SD) a key priority for every
one of his companies. Each must act socially responsible
and lower its carbon footprint. Branson stated, “I believe
that in the future, we will be able to enjoy healthy and fulfilling lifestyles whilst minimizing the negative impact we
have on the world.”
Virgin categorizes its businesses into eight socially responsible and sustainable groups: Flying high, We’re all
going on a summer holiday, Staying in touch, Watching the
pennies, Getting from A to B, My body is a temple, Out of
this world, and Just get out and relax. Each is to do exceptionally good things in its industry as well as help to alleviate the bad things that come with the category. Virgin
Wines strives to purchase only from small farms and pay
fair prices while promoting responsible drinking. Virgin

MANAGING A HOLISTIC MARKETING ORGANIZATION FOR THE LONG RUN

Games, an online gambling Web site, promotes responsible gambling and helps identify and alleviate gambling addiction. Virgin Money focuses on fair lending, and the list
goes on.
Virgin Aviation is perhaps the toughest challenge; it
represents 7 million of the 8 million tons of CO2 Virgin emits
each year. Branson, however, has turned the problem into
an opportunity. In 2006, he announced that all dividends
from Virgin’s rail and airline businesses “will be invested into
renewable energy initiatives . . . to tackle emissions related
to global warming.” That effort has evolved into the Virgin
Green Fund, which invests in renewable energy opportunities from solar energy to water purification and is estimated to reach $3 billion in value by 2016.
But Branson hasn’t stopped there. In 2007, he established the Earth Challenge to award $25 million to any
person or group who develops a safe, long-term, commercially viable way to remove greenhouse gases from the
atmosphere. Submitted inventions are now being reviewed
by a team of scientists, professors, and environment
professionals.
Once known as the “hippie capitalist” and now
knighted by the Queen of England, Sir Richard never does

| CHAPTER 22

651

anything small and quiet. Whether looking for a new business, generating publicity in his characteristic style, or encouraging research to help the planet, Branson does it with
a bang.
Questions
1. How is Virgin unique in its quest to be a socially responsible and sustainable company?
2. Discuss the pros and cons of Virgin’s “green” message. How do you feel about the company’s having
such a negative environmental impact on the world (via
air and rail) and the message it communicates through
efforts like the Earth Challenge?
3. If you were Richard Branson, what would you do with
Virgin’s holistic marketing strategy?
Sources: Peter Elkind, “Branson Gets Grounded,” Fortune, February 5, 2007, pp. 13–14; Alan
Deutschman, “The Enlightenment of Richard Branson,” Fast Company, September 2006, p. 49;
Andy Serwer, “Do Branson’s Profits Equal His Joie de Vivre?” Fortune, October 17, 2005, p. 57;
Kerry Capell with Wendy Zellner, “Richard Branson’s Next Big Adventure,” BusinessWeek, March 8,
2004, pp. 44–45; Melanie Wells, “Red Baron,” Forbes, July 3, 2000, pp. 151–60; Sam Hill and
Glenn Rifkin, Radical Marketing (New York: HarperBusiness, 1999); “Branson Pledges Three
Billion Dollars to Develop Cleaner Energy,” Terra Daily, September 21, 2006; Virgin,
www.virgin.com.

652

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

APPENDIX
Tools for Marketing Control
In this appendix, we provided detailed guidelines and insights about how to best conduct several
marketing control procedures.

Annual Plan Control
Four sets of analyses can be useful for annual plan control.

Sales Analysis Sales analysis measures and evaluates actual sales in relationship to goals. Two specific tools make it work.
Sales-variance analysis measures the relative contribution of different factors to a gap in sales
performance. Suppose the annual plan called for selling 4,000 widgets in the first quarter at $1 per
widget, for total revenue of $4,000. At quarter’s end, only 3,000 widgets were sold at $.80 per widget,
for total revenue of $2,400. How much of the sales performance gap is due to the price decline, and
how much to the volume decline? This calculation answers the question:
Variance due to price decline: ($1.00–$.80) (3,000) ⫽ $ 600
Variance due to volume decline: ($1.00) (4,000–3,000) ⫽ $1,000

37.5%
62.5%

$1,600

100.0%

Almost two-thirds of the variance is due to failure to achieve the volume target. The company
should look closely at why it failed to achieve expected sales volume.
Microsales analysis looks at specific products, territories, and so forth that failed to produce
expected sales. Suppose the company sells in three territories, and expected sales were 1,500 units,
500 units, and 2,000 units, respectively. Actual volumes were 1,400 units, 525 units, and 1,075 units,
respectively. Thus territory 1 showed a 7 percent shortfall in terms of expected sales; territory 2,
a 5 percent improvement over expectations; and territory 3, a 46 percent shortfall! Territory 3 is
causing most of the trouble. Maybe the sales rep in territory 3 is underperforming, a major
competitor has entered this territory, or business is in a recession there.
Market Share Analysis Company sales don’t reveal how well the company is performing relative
to competitors. For this, management needs to track its market share in one of three ways.
Overall market share expresses the company’s sales as a percentage of total market sales. Served
market share is sales as a percentage of the total sales to the market. The served market is all the
buyers able and willing to buy the product, and served market share is always larger than overall
market share. A company could capture 100 percent of its served market and yet have a relatively
small share of the total market. Relative market share is market share in relationship to the largest
competitor. A relative market share of exactly 100 percent means the company is tied for the lead;
over 100 percent indicates a market leader. A rise in relative market share means a company is gaining on its leading competitor.
Conclusions from market share analysis, however, are subject to qualifications:

•

•

•

•

The assumption that outside forces affect all companies in the same way is often not true. The
U.S. Surgeon General’s report on the harmful consequences of smoking depressed total cigarette
sales, but not equally for all companies.
The assumption that a company’s performance should be judged against the average
performance of all companies is not always valid. A company’s performance is best judged
against that of its closest competitors.
If a new firm enters the industry, every existing firm’s market share might fall. A decline
in market share might not mean the company is performing any worse than other
companies. Share loss depends on the degree to which the new firm hits the company’s
specific markets.
Sometimes a market share decline is deliberately engineered to improve profits. For example,
management might drop unprofitable customers or products.

APPENDIX

•

| CHAPTER 22

Market share can fluctuate for many minor reasons. For example, it can be affected by whether a
large sale occurs on the last day of the month or at the beginning of the next month. Not all shifts in
market share have marketing significance.80

A useful way to analyze market share movements is in terms of four components:
Overall
market
share

Customer
penetration

⫽

Customer
loyalty

⫻

⫻

Customer
selectivity

⫻

Price
selectivity

where:
Customer penetration Percentage of all customers who buy from the company
Customer loyalty
Purchases from the company by its customers as a percentage of their
total purchases from all suppliers of the same products
Customer selectivity
Size of the average customer purchase from the company as a percentage
of the size of the average customer purchase from an average company
Price selectivity
Average price charged by the company as a percentage of the average
price charged by all companies
Now suppose the company’s dollar market share falls during the period. The overall market share
equation provides four possible explanations: The company lost some customers (lower customer
penetration); existing customers are buying less from the company (lower customer loyalty); the
company’s remaining customers are smaller in size (lower customer selectivity); or the company’s
price has slipped relative to competition (lower price selectivity).
Marketing Expense-to-Sales Analysis Annual-plan control requires making sure the company

isn’t overspending to achieve sales goals. The key ratio to watch is marketing expense-to-sales. In one
company, this ratio was 30 percent and consisted of five component expense-to-sales ratios: sales
force-to-sales (15 percent), advertising-to-sales (5 percent), sales promotion-to-sales (6 percent),
marketing research-to-sales (1 percent), and sales administration-to-sales (3 percent).
Fluctuations outside the normal range are cause for concern. Management needs to monitor
period-to-period fluctuations in each ratio on a control chart (see
Figure 22.5). This chart
shows the advertising expense-to-sales ratio normally fluctuates between 8 percent and 12 percent,
say 99 of 100 times. In the 15th period, however, the ratio exceeded the upper control limit. Either
(1) the company still has good expense control and this situation represents a rare chance event, or
(2) the company has lost control over this expense and should find the cause. If there is no investigation, the risk is that some real change might have occurred, and the company will fall behind.
Managers should make successive observations even within the upper and lower control limits. Note
in Figure 22.5 that the level of the expense-to-sales ratio rose steadily from the 8th period onward. The
probability of encountering six successive increases in what should be independent events is only 1 in
64.81 This unusual pattern should have led to an investigation sometime before the 15th observation.

|Fig. 22.5|

Advertising Expense/Sales Ratio

14

12

Upper limit

10

Desired level

8

Lower limit

6
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Time Period

The Control-Chart
Model

653

654

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

Profit Margin

|Fig. 22.6|

Financial Model of
Return on Net Worth

1.5%
Financial
Leverage

Return on Assets

Rate of Return
on Net Worth

Net profits
Net sales
=

4.8%

x

2.6

=

12.5%

Asset Turnover

3.2

Net profits

Total assets

Net profits

Total assets

Net worth

Net worth

Net sales
Total assets

Financial Analysis Marketers should analyze the expense-to-sales ratios in an overall financial
framework to determine how and where the company is making its money. They can, and are
increasingly, using financial analysis to find profitable strategies beyond building sales.
Management uses financial analysis to identify factors that affect the company’s rate of return on
net worth.82 The main factors are shown in
Figure 22.6, along with illustrative numbers for a
large chain-store retailer. The retailer is earning a 12.5 percent return on net worth. The return on
net worth is the product of two ratios, the company’s return on assets and its financial leverage. To
improve its return on net worth, the company must increase its ratio of net profits to assets, or
increase the ratio of assets to net worth. The company should analyze the composition of its assets
(cash, accounts receivable, inventory, and plant and equipment) and see whether it can improve its
asset management.
The return on assets is the product of two ratios, the profit margin and the asset turnover. The
profit margin in Figure 22.6 seems low, whereas the asset turnover is more normal for retailing. The
marketing executive can seek to improve performance in two ways: (1) Increase the profit margin
by increasing sales or cutting costs, and (2) increase the asset turnover by increasing sales or reducing assets (inventory, receivables) held against a given level of sales.83

Profitability Control
Marketing Profitability Analysis We will illustrate the steps in marketing profitability analysis with
the following example: The marketing vice president of a lawn mower company wants to determine
the profitability of selling through three types of retail channels: hardware stores, garden supply shops,
and department stores. The company’s profit-and-loss statement is shown in
Table 22.12.

TABLE 22.12

A Simplified Profit-and-Loss Statement

Sales

$60,000

Cost of goods sold

39,000

Gross margin

$21,000

Expenses
Salaries

$9,300

Rent

3,000

Supplies

3,500
15,800

Net profit

$ 5,200

APPENDIX

Step 1: Identifying Functional Expenses Assume the expenses listed in Table 22.12 are
incurred to sell the product, advertise it, pack and deliver it, and bill and collect for it. The first
task is to measure how much of each expense was incurred in each activity.
Suppose most of the salary expense went to sales representatives and the rest to an advertising
manager, packing and delivery help, and an office accountant. Let the breakdown of the $9,300 be
$5,100, $1,200, $1,400, and $1,600, respectively.
Table 22.13 shows the allocation of the salary
expense to these four activities.

Mapping Natural Expenses into Functional Expenses

TABLE 22.13
Natural
Accounts

Total

Selling

Advertising

Packing
and Delivery

Billing
and Collecting

Salaries

$ 9,300

$5,100

$1,200

$1,400

$1,600

Rent

3,000

—

400

2,000

600

Supplies

3,500

400

1,500

1,400

200

$15,800

$5,500

$3,100

$4,800

$2,400

Table 22.13 also shows the rent account of $3,000 allocated to the four activities. Because the sales
reps work away from the office, none of the building’s rent expense is assigned to selling. Most of
the expenses for floor space and rented equipment are for packing and delivery. The supplies
account covers promotional materials, packing materials, fuel purchases for delivery, and home
office stationery. The $3,500 in this account is reassigned to functional uses of the supplies.

Step 2: Assigning Functional Expenses to Marketing Entities The next task is to measure how much functional expense was associated with selling through each type of channel.
Consider the selling effort, indicated by the number of sales in each channel. This number is in
the selling column of
Table 22.14. Altogether, 275 sales calls were made during the period.
Because the total selling expense amounted to $5,500 (see Table 22.14), the selling expense
averaged $20 per call.

TABLE 22.14

Bases for Allocating Functional Expenses to Channels
Selling

Advertising

Packing and
Delivery

Billing and
Collecting

Hardware

200

50

50

50

Garden supply

65

20

21

21

Department stores

10

30

9

9

275

100

80

80

$5,500

$3,100

$4,800

$2,400

275

100

80

80

Channel Type

Functional expense ÷ No. of Units
Equals

$

20

$

31

$

60

$

30

We can allocate advertising expense according to the number of ads addressed to different channels. Because there were 100 ads altogether, the average ad cost $31.
The packing and delivery expense is allocated according to the number of orders placed by each
type of channel. This same basis was used for allocating billing and collection expense.

Step 3: Preparing a Profit-and-Loss Statement for Each Marketing Entity We can
now prepare a profit-and-loss statement for each type of channel (see
Table 22.15). Because
hardware stores accounted for half of total sales ($30,000 out of $60,000), charge this channel

| CHAPTER 22

655

656

PART 8

CREATING SUCCESSFUL LONG-TERM GROWTH

TABLE 22.15

Profit-and-Loss Statements for Channels
Hardware

Garden
Supply

Dept.
Stores

Whole
Company

Sales

$30,000

$10,000

$20,000

$60,000

Cost of goods sold

19,500

6,500

13,000

39,000

Gross margin

$10,500

$ 3,500

$ 7,000

$21,000

$ 4,000

$ 1,300

$

200

$ 5,500

Advertising ($31 per advertisement)

1,550

620

930

3,100

Packing and delivery ($60 per order)

3,000

1,260

540

4,800

Billing ($30 per order)

1,500

630

270

2,400

Total expenses

$10,050

$ 3,810

$ 1,940

$15,800

$

$ (310)

$ 5,060

$ 5,200

Expenses
Selling ($20 per call)

Net profit or loss

450

with half the cost of goods sold ($19,500 out of $39,000). This leaves a gross margin from hardware stores of $10,500. From this we deduct the proportions of functional expenses hardware
stores consumed.
According to Table 22.14, hardware stores received 200 of 275 total sales calls. At an imputed
value of $20 a call, hardware stores must bear a $4,000 selling expense. Table 22.14 also shows hardware stores were the target of 50 ads. At $31 an ad, the hardware stores are charged with $1,550 of
advertising. The same reasoning applies in computing the share of the other functional expenses.
The result is that hardware stores gave rise to $10,050 of the total expenses. Subtracting this from
gross margin, we find the profit of selling through hardware stores is only $450.
Repeat this analysis for the other channels. The company is losing money in selling through garden supply shops and makes virtually all its profits through department stores. Notice that gross
sales is not a reliable indicator of the net profits for each channel.
Determining Corrective Action It would be naive to conclude the company should drop garden
supply and hardware stores to concentrate on department stores. We need to answer the following
questions first:

•
•
•

To what extent do buyers buy on the basis of type of retail outlet versus brand?
What trends affect the relative importance of these three channels?
How good are the company’s marketing strategies for the three channels?
Using the answers, marketing management can evaluate five alternatives:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Establish a special charge for handling smaller orders.
Give more promotional aid to garden supply shops and hardware stores.
Reduce sales calls and advertising to garden supply shops and hardware stores.
Ignore the weakest retail units in each channel.
Do nothing.

Marketing profitability analysis indicates the relative profitability of different channels, products,
territories, or other marketing entities. It does not prove the best course of action is to drop unprofitable marketing entities or capture the likely profit improvement of doing so.
Direct versus Full Costing Like all information tools, marketing profitability analysis can lead or

mislead, depending on how well marketers understand its methods and limitations. The lawn
mower company chose bases somewhat arbitrarily for allocating the functional expenses to its marketing entities. It used “number of sales calls” to allocate selling expenses, generating less record

APPENDIX

keeping and computation, when in principle “number of sales working hours” is a more accurate
indicator of cost.
A far more serious decision is whether to allocate full costs or only direct and traceable costs in
evaluating a marketing entity’s performance. The lawn mower company sidestepped this problem
by assuming only simple costs that fit with marketing activities, but we cannot avoid the question
in real-world analyses of profitability. We distinguish three types of costs:

1.

Direct costs—We can assign direct costs directly to the proper marketing entities. Sales commissions are a direct cost in a profitability analysis of sales territories, sales representatives, or
customers. Advertising expenditures are a direct cost in a profitability analysis of products to
the extent that each advertisement promotes only one product. Other direct costs for specific
purposes are sales force salaries and traveling expenses.

2.

Traceable common costs—We can assign traceable common costs only indirectly, but on a
plausible basis, to the marketing entities. In the example, we analyzed rent this way.

3.

Nontraceable common costs—Common costs whose allocation to the marketing entities is
highly arbitrary are nontraceable common costs. To allocate “corporate image” expenditures
equally to all products would be arbitrary, because all products don’t benefit equally. To allocate them proportionately to the sales of the various products would be arbitrary, because relative product sales reflect many factors besides corporate image making. Other examples are top
management salaries, taxes, interest, and other overhead.

No one disputes the inclusion of direct costs in marketing cost analysis. There is some controversy about including traceable common costs, which lump together costs that would and would
not change with the scale of marketing activity. If the lawn mower company drops garden supply
shops, it would probably continue to pay the same rent. Its profits would not rise immediately by
the amount of the present loss in selling to garden supply shops ($310).
The major controversy is about whether to allocate the nontraceable common costs to the marketing entities. Such allocation is called the full-cost approach, and its advocates argue that all costs
must ultimately be imputed in order to determine true profitability. However, this argument confuses the use of accounting for financial reporting with its use for managerial decision making. Full
costing has three major weaknesses:

1.

The relative profitability of different marketing entities can shift radically when we replace
one arbitrary way to allocate nontraceable common costs by another.

2.
3.

The arbitrariness demoralizes managers, who feel their performance is judged adversely.
The inclusion of nontraceable common costs could weaken efforts at real cost control.

Operating management is most effective in controlling direct costs and traceable common costs.
Arbitrary assignments of nontraceable common costs can lead managers to spend their time fighting cost allocations instead of managing controllable costs well.
Companies show growing interest in using marketing profitability analysis, or its broader version, activity-based cost accounting (ABC), to quantify the true profitability of different activities.84
Managers can then reduce the resources required to perform various activities, make the resources
more productive, acquire them at lower cost, or raise prices on products that consume heavy
amounts of support resources. The contribution of ABC is to refocus management’s attention
away from using only labor or material standard costs to allocate full cost, and toward capturing the
actual costs of supporting individual products, customers, and other entities.

| CHAPTER 22

657

This page intentionally left blank

Appendix
SONIC MARKETING PLAN
AND EXERCISES
The Marketing Plan: An Introduction
As a marketer, you’ll need a good marketing plan to provide direction and focus for your brand,
product, or company. With a detailed plan, any business will be better prepared to launch an
innovative new product or increase sales to current customers. Nonprofit organizations also use
marketing plans to guide their fund-raising and outreach efforts. Even government agencies put
together marketing plans for initiatives such as building public awareness of proper nutrition and
stimulating area tourism.

The Purpose and Content of a Marketing Plan
A marketing plan has a more limited scope than a business plan, which offers a broad overview of
the entire organization’s mission, objectives, strategy, and resource allocation. The marketing plan
documents how the organization’s strategic objectives will be achieved through specific marketing
strategies and tactics, with the customer as the starting point. It is also linked to the plans of other
organizational departments. Suppose a marketing plan calls for selling 200,000 units annually. The
production department must gear up to make that many units, finance must arrange funding to
cover the expenses, human resources must be ready to hire and train staff, and so on. Without the
appropriate level of organizational support and resources, no marketing plan can succeed.
Although the exact length and layout varies from company to company, a marketing plan
usually contains the sections described in Chapter 2. Smaller businesses may create shorter or less
formal marketing plans, whereas corporations generally require highly structured marketing plans.
To guide implementation effectively, every part of the plan must be described in considerable
detail. Sometimes a company will post its marketing plan on an internal Web site so managers and
employees in different locations can consult specific sections and collaborate on additions
or changes.

The Role of Research
To develop innovative products, successful strategies, and action programs, marketers need up-todate information about the environment, the competition, and the selected market segments.
Often, analysis of internal data is the starting point for assessing the current marketing situation,
supplemented by marketing intelligence and research investigating the overall market, the competition, key issues, threats, and opportunities. As the plan is put into effect, marketers use research to
measure progress toward objectives and to identify areas for improvement if results fall short of
projections.
Finally, marketing research helps marketers learn more about their customers’ requirements,
expectations, perceptions, satisfaction, and loyalty. This deeper understanding provides a foundation for building competitive advantage through well-informed segmenting, targeting, and
positioning decisions. Thus, the marketing plan should outline what marketing research will be
conducted and when, as well as how, the findings will be applied.

The Role of Relationships
Although the marketing plan shows how the company will establish and maintain profitable
customer relationships, it also affects both internal and external relationships. First, it influences
how marketing personnel work with each other and with other departments to deliver value and
satisfy customers. Second, it affects how the company works with suppliers, distributors, and
partners to achieve the plan’s objectives. Third, it influences the company’s dealings with other
stakeholders, including government regulators, the media, and the community at large. All these
relationships are important to the organization’s success and must be considered when developing a marketing plan.
Appendix

A1

From Marketing Plan to Marketing Action
Most companies create yearly marketing plans, although some plans cover a longer period.
Marketers start planning well in advance of the implementation date to allow time for marketing
research, analysis, management review, and coordination between departments. Then, after each
action program begins, marketers monitor ongoing results, investigate any deviation from the projected outcome, and take corrective steps as needed. Some marketers also prepare contingency
plans for implementation if certain conditions emerge. Because of inevitable and sometimes
unpredictable environmental changes, marketers must be ready to update and adapt marketing
plans at any time.
For effective implementation and control, the marketing plan should define how progress toward
objectives will be measured. Managers typically use budgets, schedules, and marketing metrics for
monitoring and evaluating results. With budgets, they can compare planned expenditures with actual
expenditures for a given period. Schedules allow management to see when tasks were supposed to be
completed and when they were actually completed. Marketing metrics track the actual outcomes of
marketing programs to see whether the company is moving forward toward its objectives.

Sample Marketing Plan for Sonic
This section takes you inside the sample marketing plan for Sonic, a hypothetical start-up company. The company’s first product is the Sonic 1000, a state-of-the-art, fully loaded multimedia
smart phone. Sonic will be competing with Apple, BlackBerry, Motorola, Nokia, Samsung, and
other well-established rivals in a crowded, fast-changing marketplace where smart phones have
many communication and entertainment capabilities. The annotations explain more about what
each section of the plan should contain.
This section summarizes market
opportunities, marketing strategy,
and marketing and financial
objectives for senior managers who
will read and approve the
marketing plan.

1.0 Executive Summary

The situation analysis describes
the market, the company’s
capability to serve targeted
segments, and the competition.

2.0 Situation Analysis

Market summary includes size,
needs, growth, and trends.
Describing the targeted segments
in detail provides context for
marketing strategies and programs
discussed later in the plan.

2.1 Market Summary Sonic’s market consists of consumers and business users who prefer to

A2

Appendix

Sonic is preparing to launch a major new state-of-the-art multimedia smart phone, the Sonic 1000,
in a mature market. We can effectively compete with many types of smart phones because our
product offers a unique combination of advanced features and functionality at a very competitive
value-added price. We are targeting specific segments in the consumer and business markets, taking
advantage of the growing interest in a single powerful but affordable device with extensive communication, organization, and entertainment benefits.
The primary marketing objective is to achieve first-year U.S. market share of 1 percent with unit
sales of 800,000. The primary financial objectives are to achieve first-year sales revenues of
$200 million, keep first-year losses to less than $40 million, and break even early in the second year.

Sonic, founded 18 months ago by two well-known entrepreneurs with telecommunications experience, is about to enter the highly competitive smart phone market. Multifunction cell phones are
increasingly popular for both personal and professional use, with more than 320 million smart
phones sold worldwide in 2010. Competition is increasingly intense even as technology evolves,
industry consolidation continues, and pricing pressures squeeze profitability. Palm, a PDA pioneer,
is one of several key players having difficulty adapting to the smart phone challenge. To gain market share in this dynamic environment, Sonic must carefully target specific segments with valued
features and plan for a next-generation product to keep brand momentum going.

use a powerful but affordable single device for fully functional communication, information storage and exchange, organization, and entertainment on the go. Specific segments being targeted
during the first year include professionals, corporations, students, entrepreneurs, and medical
users.
Exhibit A.1 shows how the Sonic 1000 addresses some of the most basic needs of
targeted consumer and business segments in a cost-effective manner. The additional communication and entertainment benefits of the product just enhance its appeal to those segments.
Smart phone purchasers can choose between models based on several different operating
systems. The biggest selling smart phone operating system is Symbian OS. Symbian’s smaller rivals

Targeted Segment

Customer Need

Corresponding Feature/Benefit

Professionals
(consumer market)

■ Stay in touch while on the go

■ Wireless e-mail to conveniently send and receive messages from

Students
(consumer market)

anywhere; cell phone capability for voice communication from
anywhere
■ Record information while on the go

■ Voice recognition for no-hands recording

■ Perform many functions without carrying

■ Compatible with numerous applications and peripherals for

multiple gadgets
■ Express style and individuality

convenient, cost-effective functionality
■ Case wardrobe of different colors and patterns allows users to

make a fashion statement
Corporate users
(business market)

■ Input and access critical data on the go

■ Compatible with widely available software

■ Use for proprietary tasks

■ Customizable to fit diverse corporate tasks and networks

Entrepreneurs
(business market)

■ Organize and access contacts, schedule

■ No-hands, wireless access to calendar and address book to easily

Medical users
(business market)

■ Update, access, and exchange medical

details
records

check appointments and connect with contacts
■ No-hands, wireless recording and exchange of information to

reduce paperwork and increase productivity

|Exh. A.1|

Needs and Corresponding Features/Benefits of Sonic Smart Phone
include Android, BlackBerry OS, iOS, and the Windows Phone OS. Several mobile operating
systems including Android and iOS are based on Linux and Unix. Sonic licenses a Linux-based
system because it is somewhat less vulnerable to attack by hackers and viruses. Storage capacity
(hard drive or flash drive) is an expected feature, so Sonic is equipping its first product with an
ultra-fast 64-gigabyte drive that can be supplemented by extra storage. Technology costs are
decreasing even as capabilities are increasing, which makes value-priced models more appealing to
consumers and to business users with older smart phones who want to trade up to new, high-end
multifunction units.

2.2 Strengths,Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threat Analysis Sonic has several powerful
strengths on which to build, but our major weakness is lack of brand awareness and image. The
major opportunity is demand for multifunction communication, organization, and entertainment
devices that deliver a number of valued benefits at a lower cost. We also face the threat of ever-higher
competition and downward pricing pressure.

Strengths Sonic can build on three important strengths:
1.

2.
3.

Innovative product—The Sonic 1000 offers a combination of features that are hard to find in
single devices, with extensive telecommunications capabilities and highest quality digital
video/music/TV program storage/playback.
Security—Our smart phone uses a Linux-based operating system that is less vulnerable to
hackers and other security threats that can result in stolen or corrupted data.
Pricing—Our product is priced lower than competing smart phones—none of which offer the
same bundle of features—which gives us an edge with price-conscious customers.

Weaknesses By waiting to enter the smart phone market until considerable consolidation of
competitors has occurred, Sonic has learned from the successes and mistakes of others.
Nonetheless, we have two main weaknesses:
1.

2.

Strengths are internal capabilities
that can help the company reach
its objectives.

Weaknesses are internal elements
that may interfere with the
company’s ability to achieve its
objectives.

Lack of brand awareness—Sonic has no established brand or image, whereas Samsung, Apple,
Motorola, and others have strong brand recognition. We will address this issue with aggressive
promotion.
Heavier and thicker unit—The Sonic 1000 is slightly heavier and thicker than most competing
models because it incorporates so many telecommunication and multimedia features. To
counteract this weakness, we will emphasize our product’s benefits and value-added pricing,
two compelling competitive strengths.
Appendix

A3

Opportunities are areas of buyer
need or potential interest in which
the company might perform
profitably.

Opportunities Sonic can take advantage of two major market opportunities:
1.

2.

Threats are challenges posed by an
unfavorable trend or development
that could lead to lower sales and
profits.

Threats We face three main threats at the introduction of the Sonic 1000:
1.

2.

3.

This section identifies key
competitors, describes their market
positions, and provides an
overview of their strategies.

Increasing demand for state-of-the-art multimedia devices with a full array of communication
functions—The market for cutting-edge multimedia, multifunction devices is growing much
rapidly. Smart phones are already commonplace in public, work, and educational settings; in
fact, users who bought entry-level models are now trading up.
Lower technology costs—Better technology is now available at a lower cost than ever before.
Thus, Sonic can incorporate advanced features at a value-added price that allows for reasonable profits.

Increased competition—More companies are offering devices with some but not all of the
features and benefits provided by the Sonic 1000. Therefore, Sonic’s marketing communications must stress our clear differentiation and value-added pricing.
Downward pressure on pricing—Increased competition and market share strategies are pushing smart phone prices down. Still, our objective of breaking even with second-year sales of
the original model is realistic, given the lower margins in the smart phone market.
Compressed product life cycle—Smart phones are reaching the maturity stage of their life cycle
more quickly than earlier technology products. Because of this compressed life cycle, we plan
to introduce an even greater enhanced media-oriented second product during the year following the Sonic 1000’s launch.

2.3 Competition The emergence of well-designed multifunction smart phones, including the
Apple iPhone, has increased competitive pressure. Competitors are continually adding features and
sharpening price points. Key competitors:
•

•

•

•

•

Motorola. Motorola has a long tradition of successful cell phones—it sold millions and
millions of its RAZR clamshell phones worldwide. It has struggled in recent years, however, to
keep up with competition.
Apple. The initial iPhone, a smart phone with a 3.5-inch color screen, was designed with
entertainment enthusiasts in mind. It’s well equipped for music, video, and Web access, plus
calendar and contact management functions. Apple initially partnered only with the AT&T
network and cut the product’s price to $399 two months after introduction to speed market
penetration.
RIM. Research In Motion makes the lightweight BlackBerry wireless phone/PDA products
that are popular among corporate users. RIM’s continuous innovation and solid customer
service support strengthen its competitive standing as it introduces more smart phones and
PDAs.
Samsung. Value, style, function: Samsung is a powerful competitor, offering a variety of smart
phones and Ultra-Mobile PCs for consumer and business segments. Some of its smart phones
are available for specific telecommunications carriers and some are “unlocked,” ready for any
compatible telecommunications network.
Nokia. With a presence in virtually every possible cell phone market, Nokia is always an experienced, formidable opponent. Having launched one of the early smart phones, it will be
expected to aggressively compete in the smart phone market.

Despite strong competition, Sonic can carve out a definite image and gain recognition among
targeted segments. Our appealing combination of state-of-the-art features and low price is a critical
point of differentiation for competitive advantage. Our second product will be even more mediaoriented to appeal to segments where we will have strong brand recognition.
Exhibit A.2 shows
a sample of competitive products and prices.
This section summarizes the main
features of the company’s various
products.

A4

Appendix

2.4 Product Offerings The Sonic 1000 offers the following standard features:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Voice recognition for hands-free operation
Full array of apps
Complete organization functions, including linked calendar, address book, synchronization
Digital music/video/television recording, wireless downloading, and instant playback
Wireless Web and e-mail, text messaging, instant messaging
Four-inch high-quality color touch screen

Samsung Galaxy
S - Captivate

Apple iPhone 4

Motorola Droid Pro
Nokia N900

BlackBerry
Storm 2 9550

Storage

32 GB memory card

32 GB flash drive

Supports up to
32 GB micro SD

Up to 32 GB Internal
16 GB mirco SD
(sold separately)

2GB eMMC
16MB media card
included

Display

WVGA 4" touch screen

Retina display 3.5”
(diagonal) widescreen
multi-touch screen

HGVA
3.1” touch screen

WVGA
3.5” touch screen

3.25" touch screen

Camera

Auto focus
5.0 MP
4× digital zoom
Video MPEG4, AAC, AAC+
H.263 H.264
Video streaming

Tap to focus
5.0 MP
VGA quality photos
LED flash
Video recording
Geotagging

Auto focus
5 MP
Digital zoom
LED flash
Image editing tools

Auto focus with two-stage
capture key
5 MP
Dual LED flash
Image editing tools
Geotagging

Auto focus
3.2 MP
2x digital zoom
Flash
Auto focus
Image stabilization
Video recording

Price

$449-$599

$723
$199 16 GB
$299 32 GB

$449–$489

$349

$349

|Exh. A.2|

Selected Smart Phone Products and Pricing
•
•

Ultra-fast 64-gigabyte drive and expansion slots
Integrated 12 megapixel camera with flash and photo editing/sharing tools

First-year sales revenues are projected to be $200 million, based on sales of 800,000 of the Sonic
1000 model at a wholesale price of $250 each. Our second-year product will be the Sonic All Media
2000, stressing enhanced multimedia communication, networking, and entertainment functions.
The Sonic All Media 2000 will include Sonic 1000 features plus additional features such as:
•
•
•

Built-in media beaming to share music, video, and television files with other devices
Webcam for instant video capture and uploading to popular video Web sites
Voice-command access to popular social networking Web sites

2.5 Distribution Sonic-branded products will be distributed through a network of retailers in
the top 50 U.S. markets. Among the most important channel partners being contacted are:
•
•
•
•

Office supply superstores. Office Max, Office Depot, and Staples will all carry Sonic products in
stores, in catalogs, and online.
Computer stores. CompUSA and independent computer retailers will carry Sonic products.
Electronics specialty stores. Best Buy will feature Sonic smart phones in its stores, online, and in
its media advertising.
Online retailers. Amazon.com will carry Sonic smart phones and, for a promotional fee, will
give Sonic prominent placement on its homepage during the introduction.

Distribution explains each channel
for the company’s products and
mentions new developments and
trends.

Distribution will initially be restricted to the United States, with appropriate sales promotion
support. Later, we plan to expand into Canada and beyond.

3.0 Marketing Strategy
3.1 Objectives We have set aggressive but achievable objectives for the first and second years of
market entry.
•
•

First-Year Objectives. We are aiming for a 1 percent share of the U.S. smart phone market
through unit sales volume of 800,000.
Second-Year Objectives. Our second-year objective is to achieve break-even on the Sonic 1000
and launch our second model.

Objectives should be defined in
specific terms so management can
measure progress and take
corrective action to stay on track.

Appendix

A5

All marketing strategies start with
segmentation, targeting, and
positioning.

3.2 Target Markets Sonic’s strategy is based on a positioning of product differentiation. Our
primary consumer target for the Sonic 1000 is middle- to upper-income professionals who need
one fully loaded device to coordinate their busy schedules, stay in touch with family and colleagues,
and be entertained on the go. Our secondary consumer target is high school, college, and graduate
students who want a multimedia, dual-mode device. This segment can be described demographically by age (16–30) and education status. Our Sonic All Media 2000 will be aimed at teens and
twentysomethings who want a device with features to support social networking and heavier, more
extensive entertainment media consumption.
The primary business target for the Sonic 1000 is mid- to large-sized corporations that want to
help their managers and employees stay in touch and input or access critical data when out of the
office. This segment consists of companies with more than $25 million in annual sales and more
than 100 employees. A secondary target is entrepreneurs and small business owners. Also we will
target medical users who want to update or access patients’ medical records.
Each of the marketing-mix strategies conveys Sonic’s differentiation to these target market
segments.

Positioning identifies the brand,
benefits, points of difference, and
parity for the product or line.

3.3 Positioning Using product differentiation, we are positioning the Sonic smart phone as the
most versatile, convenient, value-added model for personal and professional use. Our marketing
will focus on the value-priced multiple communication, entertainment, and information
capabilities differentiating the Sonic 1000.

3.4 Strategies
Product strategy includes
decisions about product mix and
lines, brands, packaging and
labeling, and warranties.

Product The Sonic 1000, including all the features described in the earlier Product Review section

Pricing strategy covers decisions
about setting initial prices and
adapting prices in response to
opportunities and competitive
challenges.

Pricing The Sonic 1000 will be introduced at a $250 wholesale price and a $300 estimated retail

Distribution strategy includes
selection and management of
channel relationships to deliver
value to customers.

Distribution Our channel strategy is to use selective distribution, marketing Sonic smart
phones through well-known stores and online retailers. During the first year, we will add channel
partners until we have coverage in all major U.S. markets and the product is included in the major
electronics catalogs and Web sites. We will also investigate distribution through cell-phone outlets
maintained by major carriers such as Verizon Wireless. In support of channel partners, we will
provide demonstration products, detailed specification handouts, and full-color photos and
displays featuring the product. Finally, we plan to arrange special payment terms for retailers that
place volume orders.

Marketing communications
strategy covers all efforts to
communicate to target audiences
and channel members.

Marketing Communications By integrating all messages in all media, we will reinforce the
brand name and the main points of product differentiation. Research about media consumption
patterns will help our advertising agency choose appropriate media and timing to reach prospects
before and during product introduction. Thereafter, advertising will appear on a pulsing basis to
maintain brand awareness and communicate various differentiation messages. The agency will also
coordinate public relations efforts to build the Sonic brand and support the differentiation
message. To generate buzz, we will host a user-generated video contest on our Web site. To attract,
retain, and motivate channel partners for a push strategy, we will use trade sales promotions and
personal selling. Until the Sonic brand has been established, our communications will encourage
purchases through channel partners rather than from our Web site.

The marketing mix includes tactics
and programs that support
product, pricing, distribution, and
marketing communications
strategy.

3.5 Marketing Mix The Sonic 1000 will be introduced in February. Here are summaries of
action programs we will use during the first six months to achieve our stated objectives.

A6

Appendix

and more, will be sold with a one-year warranty. We will introduce the Sonic All Media 2000 during
the following year, after we have established our Sonic brand. The brand and logo (Sonic’s distinctive
yellow thunderbolt) will be displayed on our products and packaging as well as in all marketing
campaigns.
price per unit. We expect to lower the price of this model when we expand the product line by
launching the Sonic All Media 2000, to be priced at $350 wholesale per unit. These prices reflect
a strategy of (1) attracting desirable channel partners and (2) taking share from established
competitors.

•

January. We will launch a $200,000 trade sales promotion campaign and participate in major
industry trade shows to educate dealers and generate channel support for the product launch

•

•

•
•

•

in February. Also, we will create buzz by providing samples to selected product reviewers,
opinion leaders, influential bloggers, and celebrities. Our training staff will work with retail
sales personnel at major chains to explain the Sonic 1000’s features, benefits, and advantages.
February. We will start an integrated print/radio/Internet campaign targeting professionals
and consumers. The campaign will show how many functions the Sonic smart phone can
perform and emphasize the convenience of a single, powerful handheld device. This multimedia campaign will be supported by point-of-sale signage as well as online-only ads and
video tours.
March. As the multimedia advertising campaign continues, we will add consumer sales
promotions such as a contest in which consumers post videos to our Web site, showing how
they use the Sonic in creative and unusual ways. We will also distribute new point-of-purchase
displays to support our retailers.
April. We will hold a trade sales contest offering prizes for the salesperson and retail organization that sells the most Sonic smart phones during the four-week period.
May. We plan to roll out a new national advertising campaign this month. The radio ads will
feature celebrity voices telling their Sonic smart phones to perform functions such as initiating
a phone call, sending an e-mail, playing a song or video, and so on. The stylized print and
online ads will feature avatars of these celebrities holding their Sonic smart phones. We plan to
repeat this theme for next year’s product launch.
June. Our radio campaign will add a new voice-over tagline promoting the Sonic 1000 as a
graduation gift. We will exhibit at the semiannual electronics trade show and provide retailers
with new competitive comparison handouts as a sales aid. In addition, we will analyze the
results of customer satisfaction research for use in future campaigns and product development
efforts.

Programs should coordinate with
the resources and activities of
other departments that contribute
to customer value for each
product.

3.6 Marketing Research Using research, we will identify specific features and benefits our target market segments value. Feedback from market tests, surveys, and focus groups will help us
develop and fine-tune the Sonic All Media 2000. We are also measuring and analyzing customers’
attitudes toward competing brands and products. Brand awareness research will help us determine
the effectiveness and efficiency of our messages and media. Finally, we will use customer satisfaction studies to gauge market reaction.

This section shows how marketing
research will support the
development, implementation, and
evaluation of marketing strategies
and programs.

4.0 Financials

Financials include budgets and
forecasts to plan for marketing
expenditures, scheduling, and
operations.

Total first-year sales revenue for the Sonic 1000 is projected at $200 million, with an average wholesale price of $250 per unit and variable cost per unit of $150 for unit sales volume of 800,000. We
anticipate a first-year loss of up to $40 million. Break-even calculations indicate that the Sonic 1000
will become profitable after the sales volume exceeds 267,500 during the product’s second year. Our
break-even analysis assumes per-unit wholesale revenue of $250 per unit, variable cost of $150 per
unit, and estimated first-year fixed costs of $26,750,000. With these assumptions, the break-even
calculation is:
26,750,000
= 267,500 units
$250 - $150

5.0 Controls
Controls are being established to cover implementation and the organization of our marketing
activities.

5.1 Implementation We are planning tight control measures to closely monitor quality and customer service satisfaction. This will enable us to react very quickly in correcting any problems that
may occur. Other early warning signals that will be monitored for signs of deviation from the plan
include monthly sales (by segment and channel) and monthly expenses.
5.2 Marketing Organization Sonic’s chief marketing officer, Jane Melody, holds overall
responsibility for all of the company’s marketing activities.
Exhibit A.3 shows the structure

Controls help management
measure results and identify any
problems or performance variations
that need corrective action.

The marketing department may be
organized by function, as in this
sample, or by geography, product,
customer, or some combination of
these.
Appendix

A7

|Exh. A.3|

Jane Melody,
Chief Marketing
Officer

Sonic’s Marketing
Organization
Tony Calella,
Sales
Manager

Tiffany White,
Regional
Sales

Amelia Howard,
Advertising
Manager

Carlos Dunn,
Advertising
Analyst

Ron Hall,
Promotion
Manager

Kate McConnell,
Promotion
Analyst

Viktor Chenkov,
Regional
Sales

of the eight-person marketing organization. Sonic has hired Worldwide Marketing to handle
national sales campaigns, trade and consumer sales promotions, and public relations efforts.

Sonic Marketing Plan Chapter
Assignments1
Chapter 2
As an assistant to Jane Melody, Sonic’s chief marketing officer, you’ve been assigned to draft a
mission statement for top management’s review. This should cover the competitive spheres within
which the firm will operate and your recommendation of an appropriate generic competitive
strategy. Using your knowledge of marketing, the information you have about Sonic, and library or
Internet resources, answer the following questions.
•
•
•

What should Sonic’s mission be?
In what competitive spheres (industry, products and applications, competence, marketsegment, vertical, and geographic) should Sonic operate?
Which of Porter’s generic competitive strategies would you recommend Sonic follow in
formulating overall strategy?

As your instructor directs, enter your answers and supporting information in a written marketing plan or use Marketing Plan Pro software to document your ideas.

Chapter 3
Jane Melody asks you to scan Sonic’s external environment for early warning signals of new opportunities and emerging threats that could affect the success of the Sonic 1000 smart phone. Using
Internet or library sources (or both), locate information to answer three questions about key areas
of the macroenvironment.
•
•
•

What demographic changes are likely to affect Sonic’s targeted segments?
What economic trends might influence buyer behavior in Sonic’s targeted segments?
How might the rapid pace of technological change/alter Sonic’s competitive situation?

Enter your answers about Sonic’s environment in the appropriate sections of a written marketing plan or use the Marketing Plan Pro software to record your comments.
A8

Appendix

Chapter 4
Your next task is to consider how marketing research can help Sonic support its marketing strategy.
Jane Melody also asks you how Sonic can measure results after the marketing plan is implemented.
She wants you to answer the following three questions.
•

•

•

What surveys, focus groups, observation, behavioral data, or experiments will Sonic need to support its marketing strategy? Be specific about the questions or issues that Sonic needs to resolve
using marketing research.
Where can you find suitable secondary data about total demand for smart phones over the
next two years? Identify at least two sources (online or offline), describe what you plan to draw
from each source, and indicate how the data would be useful for Sonic’s marketing planning.
Recommend three specific marketing metrics for Sonic to apply in determining marketing
effectiveness and efficiency.

Enter this information in the marketing plan you’ve been writing or use the Marketing Plan Pro
software to document your responses.

Chapter 5
Sonic has decided to focus on total customer satisfaction as a way of encouraging brand loyalty in a
highly competitive marketplace. With this in mind, you’ve been assigned to analyze three specific
issues as you continue working on Sonic’s marketing plan.
•
•
•

How (and how often) should Sonic monitor customer satisfaction?
Would you recommend that Sonic use the Net Promoter method? Explain your reasoning.
Which customer touch points should Sonic pay particularly close attention to, and why?

Consider your answers in the context of Sonic’s current situation and the objectives it has set.
Then enter your latest decisions in the written marketing plan or using Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 6
You’re responsible for researching and analyzing the consumer market for Sonic’s smart phone
product. Look again at the data you’ve already entered about the company’s current situation and
macroenvironment, especially the market being targeted. Now answer these questions about the
market and buyer behavior.
•

•
•

What cultural, social, and personal factors are likely to most influence consumer purchasing of
smart phones? What research tools would help you better understand the effect on buyer attitudes and behavior?
Which aspects of consumer behavior should Sonic’s marketing plan emphasize and why?
What marketing activities should Sonic plan to coincide with each stage of the consumer buying process?

After you’ve analyzed these aspects of consumer behavior, consider the implications for Sonic’s
marketing efforts to support the launch of its smart phone. Finally, document your findings and
conclusions in a written marketing plan or with Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 7
You’ve been learning more about the business market for Sonic’s smart phone. Jane Melody has
defined this market as mid- to large-sized corporations that want their employees to stay in touch
and be able to input or access data from any location. Respond to the following three questions
based on your knowledge of Sonic’s current situation and business-to-business marketing.
•
•
•

What types of businesses appear to fit Melody’s market definition? How can you research the
number of employees and find other data about these types of businesses?
What type of purchase would a Sonic smart phone represent for these businesses? Who would
participate in and influence this type of purchase?
Would demand for smart phones among corporate buyers tend to be inelastic? What are the
implications for Sonic’s marketing plan?
Appendix

A9

Your answers to these questions will affect how Sonic plans marketing activities for the business
segments to be targeted. Take a few minutes to note your ideas in a written marketing plan or using
Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 8
Identifying suitable market segments and selecting targets are critical to the success of any marketing plan. As Jane Melody’s assistant, you’re responsible for market segmentation and targeting.
Look back at the market information, buyer behavior data, and competitive details you previously
gathered as you answer the following questions.
•
•
•

Which variables should Sonic use to segment its consumer and business markets?
How can Sonic evaluate the attractiveness of each identified segment? Should Sonic market to
one consumer segment and one business segment or target more than one in each market? Why?
Should Sonic pursue full market coverage, market specialization, product specialization, selective specialization, or single-segment concentration? Why?

Next, consider how your decisions about segmentation and targeting will affect Sonic’s marketing efforts. Depending on your instructor’s directions, summarize your conclusions in a written
marketing plan or use Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 9
Sonic is a new brand with no prior brand associations, which presents a number of marketing
opportunities and challenges. Jane Melody has given you responsibility for making recommendations about three brand equity issues that are important to Sonic’s marketing plan.
•
•
•

What brand elements would be most useful for differentiating the Sonic brand from competing brands?
How can Sonic sum up its brand promise for the new smart phone?
Should Sonic add a brand for its second product or retain the Sonic name?

Be sure your brand ideas are appropriate in light of what you’ve learned about your targeted
segments and the competition. Then add this information to your written marketing plan or the
plan you’ve been developing with Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 10
As before, you’re working with Jane Melody on Sonic’s marketing plan for launching a new smart
phone. Now you’re focusing on Sonic’s positioning and product life-cycle strategies by answering
three specific questions.
•
•
•

In a sentence or two, what is an appropriate positioning for the Sonic 1000 smart phone?
Knowing the stage of Sonic’s smart phone in the product life cycle, what are the implications
for pricing, promotion, and distribution?
In which stage of its evolution does the smart phone market appear to be? What does this
mean for Sonic’s marketing plans?

Document your ideas in a written marketing plan or in Marketing Plan Pro. Note any additional
research you may need to determine how to proceed after the Sonic 1000 has been launched.

Chapter 11
Sonic is a new entrant in an established industry characterized by competitors with relatively high
brand identity and strong market positions. Use research and your knowledge of how to deal with
competitors to consider three issues that will affect the company’s ability to successfully introduce
its first product:
•
•
A10

Appendix

What factors will you use to determine Sonic’s strategic group?
Should Sonic select a class of competitor to attack on the basis of strength versus weakness,
closeness versus distance, or good versus bad? Why is this appropriate in the smart phone
market?

•

As a start-up company, what competitive strategy would be most effective as Sonic introduces
its first product?

Take time to analyze how Sonic’s competitive strategy will affect its marketing strategy and tactics.
Now summarize your ideas in a written marketing plan or using Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 12
Introducing a new product entails a variety of decisions about product strategy, including differentiation, ingredient branding, packaging, labeling, warranty, and guarantee. Your next task is to
answer the following questions about Sonic’s product strategy.
•
•
•

Which aspect of product differentiation would be most valuable in setting Sonic apart from its
competitors, and why?
Should Sonic use ingredient branding to tout the Linux-based operating system that it says
makes its smart phone more secure than smart phones based on some other operating systems?
How can Sonic use packaging and labeling to support its brand image and help its channel
partners sell the smart phone product more effectively?

Once you’ve answered these questions, incorporate your ideas into the marketing plan you’ve
been writing or document them using the Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 13
You’re planning customer support services for Sonic’s new smart phone product. Review what you
know about your target market and its needs; also think about what Sonic’s competitors are offering.
Then respond to these three questions about designing and managing services.
•
•
•

What support services are buyers of smart phone products likely to want and need?
How can Sonic manage gaps between perceived service and expected service to satisfy customers?
What postsale service arrangements must Sonic make and how would you expect these to
affect customer satisfaction?

Consider how your service strategy will support Sonic’s overall marketing efforts. Summarize your
recommendations in a written marketing plan or use Marketing Plan Pro to document your ideas.

Chapter 14
You’re in charge of pricing Sonic’s product for its launch early next year. Review the SWOT analysis you
previously prepared as well as Sonic’s competitive environment, targeting strategy, and product positioning. Now continue working on your marketing plan by responding to the following questions.
•
•
•

What should Sonic’s primary pricing objective be? Explain your reasoning.
Are smart phone customers likely to be price sensitive? What are the implications for your
pricing decisions?
What price adaptations (such as discounts, allowances, and promotional pricing) should
Sonic include in its marketing plan?

Make notes about your answers to these questions and then document the information in a written marketing plan or use Marketing Plan Pro software, depending on your instructor’s directions.

Chapter 15
At Sonic, you have been asked to develop a marketing channel system for the new Sonic 1000 smart
phone. Based on what you know about designing and managing integrated marketing channels,
answer the three questions that follow.
•
•
•

Do you agree with Jane Melody’s decision to use a push strategy for the new product? Explain
your reasoning.
How many channel levels are appropriate for Sonic’s targeted consumer and business segments?
In determining the number of channel members, should you use exclusive, selective, or intensive distribution? Why?

Appendix

A11

Be sure your marketing channel ideas support the product positioning and are consistent with
the goals that have been set. Record your recommendations in a written marketing plan or use
Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 16
At this point, you need to make more specific decisions about managing the marketing intermediaries for Sonic’s first product. Formulate your ideas by answering the following questions.
•
•
•

What types of retailers would be most appropriate for distributing Sonic’s smart phone? What
are the advantages and disadvantages of selling through these types of retailers?
What role should wholesalers play in Sonic’s distribution strategy? Why?
What market-logistics issues must Sonic consider for the launch of its first smart phone?

Summarize your decisions about retailing, wholesaling, and logistics in the marketing plan
you’ve been writing or in the Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 17
Jane Melody has assigned you to plan integrated marketing communications for Sonic’s new product introduction. Review the data, decisions, and strategies you previously documented in your
marketing plan before you answer the next three questions.
•
•
•

What communications objectives are appropriate for Sonic’s initial campaign?
How can Sonic use personal communications channels to influence its target audience?
Which communication tools would you recommend using after Sonic’s initial product has
been in the market for six months? Why?

Confirm that your marketing communications plans make sense in light of Sonic’s overall
marketing efforts. Now, as your instructor directs, summarize your thoughts in a written marketing
plan or in the Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 18
Mass communications will play a key role in Sonic’s product introduction. After reviewing your earlier
decisions and thinking about the current situation (especially your competitive circumstances),
respond to the following questions to continue planning Sonic’s marketing communications strategy.
•
•
•

Once Sonic begins to use consumer advertising, what goals would be appropriate?
Should Sonic continue consumer and trade sales promotion after the new product has been in
the market for six months? Explain your reasoning.
Jane Melody wants you to recommend an event sponsorship possibility that would be appropriate for the new product campaign. What type of event would you suggest and what objectives would you set for the sponsorship?

Record your ideas about mass communications in the marketing plan you’ve been writing or
use Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 19
Sonic needs a strategy for managing personal communications during its new product launch. This
is the time to look at interactive marketing, word of mouth, and personal selling. Answer these
three questions as you consider Sonic’s personal communications strategy.
•
•
•

Which forms of interactive marketing are appropriate for Sonic, given its objectives, mass
communications arrangements, and channel decisions?
How should Sonic use word of mouth to generate brand awareness and encourage potential
buyers to visit retailers to see the new smart phone in person?
Does Sonic need a direct sales force or can it sell through agents and other outside representatives?

Look back at earlier decisions and ideas before you document your comments about personal
communications in your written marketing plan or using Marketing Plan Pro software.
A12

Appendix

Chapter 20
Knowing that the smart phone market is likely to remain highly competitive, Jane Melody wants
you to look ahead at how Sonic can develop new products outside the smart phone market. Review
the competitive situation and the market situation before you continue working on the Sonic
marketing plan.
•
•
•

List three new-product ideas that build on Sonic’s strengths and the needs of its various target
segments. What criteria should Sonic use to screen these ideas?
Develop the most promising idea into a product concept and explain how Sonic can test this
concept. What particular dimensions must be tested?
Assume that the most promising idea tests well. Now develop a marketing strategy for introducing it, including a description of the target market; the product positioning; the estimated
sales, profit, and market share goals for the first year; your channel strategy; and the marketing
budget you will recommend for this new product introduction. If possible, estimate Sonic’s
costs and conduct a break-even analysis.

Document all the details of your new-product development ideas in the written marketing plan
or use Marketing Plan Pro software.

Chapter 21
As Jane Melody’s assistant, you’re researching how to market the Sonic 1000 smart phone product
outside the United States within a year. You’ve been asked to answer the following questions about
Sonic’s use of global marketing.
•

•
•

As a start-up company, should Sonic use indirect or direct exporting, licensing, joint ventures,
or direct investment to enter the Canadian market next year? To enter other markets? Explain
your answers.
If Sonic starts marketing its smart phone in other countries, which of the international product
strategies is most appropriate? Why?
Although some components are made in Asia, Sonic’s smart phones will be assembled in
Mexico through a contractual arrangement with a local factory. How are country-of-origin
perceptions likely to affect your marketing recommendations?

Think about how these global marketing issues fit into Sonic’s overall marketing strategy. Now
document your ideas in the marketing plan you’ve been writing or using Marketing Plan Pro.

Chapter 22
With the rest of the marketing plan in place, you’re ready to make recommendations about how to
manage Sonic’s marketing activities. Here are some specific questions Jane Melody wants you to
consider.
•
•
•

How can Sonic drive customer-focused marketing and strategic innovation throughout the
organization?
What role should social responsibility play in Sonic’s marketing?
How can Sonic evaluate its marketing? Suggest several specific steps the company should take.

To complete your marketing plan, enter your answers to these questions in the written marketing
plan or in Marketing Plan Pro software. Finally, draft the executive summary of the plan’s highlights.

Appendix

A13

This page intentionally left blank

Endnotes
Chapter 1
1. Michael Learmonth, “Social Media Paves Way to White
House,” Advertising Age, March 30, 2009, p. 16;
Noreen O’Leary, “GMBB,” AdweekMedia, June 15,
2009, p. 2; John Quelch, “The Marketing of a
President,” Harvard Business School Working
Knowledge, November 12, 2008.
2. Philip Kotler, “Marketing: The Underappreciated
Workhorse,” Market Leader Quarter 2 (2009), pp. 8–10.
3. Peter C. Verhoef and Peter S. H. Leeflang,
“Understanding the Marketing Department’s Influence
within the Firm,” Journal of Marketing 73 (March 2009),
pp. 14–37.
4. Eric Newman, “To Boost the Bottom Line, Strengthen
the Front Line,” Brandweek, June 9, 2008, p. 10.
5. Stephanie Clifford, “A Video Prank at Domino’s Taints
Brand,” New York Times, April 15, 2009; Thom Forbes,
“Domino’s Takes Cautious Approach to ‘Prank’ Video,”
Ad Age, April 15, 2009.
6. Jon Fine, “Marketing’s Drift Away From Media,”
BusinessWeek, August 17, 2009, p. 64.
7. American Marketing Association, “Definition of
Marketing,” www.marketingpower.com/AboutAMA/
Pages/DefinitionofMarketing.aspx, 2007; Lisa Keefe,
“Marketing Defined,” Marketing News, January 15,
2008, pp. 28–29.
8. Peter Drucker, Management: Tasks, Responsibilities,
Practices (New York: Harper and Row, 1973),
pp. 64–65.
9. B. Joseph Pine II and James Gilmore, The Experience
Economy (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1999); Bernd Schmitt, Experience Marketing (New
York: Free Press, 1999); Philip Kotler, “Dream
Vacations: The Booming Market for Designed
Experiences,” The Futurist, October 1984, pp. 7–13.
10. Irving J. Rein, Philip Kotler, Michael Hamlin, and
Martin Stoller, High Visibility, 3rd ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2006).
11. Philip Kotler, Christer Asplund, Irving Rein, and Donald
H. Haider, Marketing Places in Europe: Attracting
Investments, Industries, Residents, and Visitors to
European Cities, Communities, Regions, and Nations
(London: Financial Times Prentice Hall, 1999); Philip
Kotler, Irving J. Rein, and Donald Haider, Marketing
Places: Attracting Investment, Industry, and Tourism
to Cities, States, and Nations (New York: Free
Press, 1993).
12. Michael McCarthy, “Vegas Goes Back to Naughty
Roots,” USA Today, April 11, 2005; Julie Dunn, “Vegas
Hopes for Payoff with Denverites,” Denver Post, June
16, 2005; John M. Broder, “The Pied Piper of Las
Vegas Seems to Have Perfect Pitch,” New York Times,
June 4, 2004; Chris Jones, “Las Vegas Tourism: Fewer
Visitors, Don’t Blame Fuel,” Las Vegas Review-Journal,
July 15, 2006; Richard Velotta, “Report: Las Vegas

Tourism Tumbles 11.9 percent in January,” Las Vegas
Sun, March 10, 2009.
13. Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, “Versioning: The Smart
Way to Sell Information,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1998, pp. 106–14.
14. John R. Brandt, “Dare to Be Different,” Chief Executive,
May 2003, pp. 34–38.
15. Jena McGregor, Matthew Boyle, and Peter Burrows,
“Your New Customer: The State,” BusinessWeek,
March 23 and 30, 2009, p. 66.
16. Jeffrey Rayport and John Sviokla, “Exploring the
Virtual Value Chain,” Harvard Business Review,
November– December 1995, pp. 75–85; Jeffrey
Rayport and John Sviokla, “Managing in the
Marketspace,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1994, pp. 141–150.
17. Mohan Sawhney, Seven Steps to Nirvana (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2001).
18. Nikolaus Franke, Peter Keinz, and Christoph J. Steger,
“Testing the Value of Customization: When Do
Customers Really Prefer Products Tailored to Their
Preferences?” Journal of Marketing 73 (September
2009), pp. 103–21.
19. Tom Szaky, “Revolution in a Bottle,” Portfolio Trade,
2009; Linda M. Castellito, “TerraCycle Founder’s
Journey Started with Worm Poop,” USA Today,
September 25, 2009, p. 5B.
20. “Food Site Finds Recipe For Mixing in Sponsors,
On the Hot Seat,” Boston Globe, September 6, 2009,
p. G3; “Allrecipes.com Stirs Up Success,” press
release, www.allrecipes.com, July 21, 2009; Eric
Engelman, “Questions for Lisa Sharples, President of
Allrecipes.com,” Puget Sound Business Journal,
October 10, 2008.
21. Adam Lashinsky, “Shoutout in Gadget Land,”
Fortune, November 10, 2003, pp. 77–86;
“Computer Industry Trends: Top 100 Companies,”
www.netvalley.com; Tim Conneally, “Gartner: Acer
Gains Big Worldwide, Apple Gains in US,” Betanews,
October 15, 2008.
22. “Dick’s Sporting Goods, Inc. (DKS.N) (New York Stock
Exchange),” Reuters, www.reuters.com.
23. Anya Kamenetz, “The Network Unbound,” Fast
Company, June 2006, pp. 69–73.
24. David Kiley, “Advertisers, Start Your Engines,”
BusinessWeek, March 6, 2006, p. 26; Cameron Wykes,
“Making Sense Out of Social Nets,” AdweekMedia,
July 6, 2009, p. 2.
25. “2005 Marketing Receptivity Survey,” Yankelovich
Partners Inc., April 18, 2005.
26. Kate Brumbeck, “Alabama Flea Market Owner Turns
Into YouTube Phenomenon,” Associated Press, June
30, 2007.
27. Martin Bosworth, “Loyalty Cards: Rewards or
Threats?” ConsumerAffairs.com, July 11, 2005.
Endnotes

E1

28. Antonio Gonsalves, “Dell Makes $3 Million from TwitterRelated Sales,” InformationWeek, June 12, 2009.
29. Linda Tischler, “What’s The Buzz?” Fast Company,
May 2004, p. 76.
30. Valerie Alderson, “Measuring the Value of a Managed
WOM Program in Test & Control Markets,” BzzAgent
Inc., 2007.
31. Suzanne Vranica, “Marketers Aim New Ads at Video
iPod Users,” Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2006;
Kevin Redmond, “GPS ⫹ Mobile Marketing ⫽
Goodness,” Barbarian Blog, February 21, 2009.
32. Bruce Horovitz, “In Trend Toward Vanity Food, It’s
Getting Personal,” USA Today, August 9, 2006.
33. Josh Catone, “15 Companies That Really Get
Corporate Blogging,” www.sitepoint.com.
34. “Intranet Case Study: GM’s mySocrates,”
www.communitelligence.com.
35. Gail McGovern and John A. Quelch, “The Fall and Rise
of the CMO,” Strategy ⫹ Business, Winter 2004.
36. Richard Rawlinson, “Beyond Brand Management,”
Strategy ⫹ Business, Summer 2006.
37. Jennifer Rooney, “As If You Didn’t Know by Now, It’s
About the Bottom Line for CMOs,” Advertising Age,
May 5, 2008, pp. 3–57.
38. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Solving the CMO Puzzle,”
Marketing News, March 30, 2009, p. 12.
39. Constantine von Hoffman, “Armed with Intelligence,”
Brandweek, May 29, 2006, pp. 17–20.
40. “China’s Second Biggest PC Maker to Push Windows,”
www.digitalworldtokyo.com, April 15, 2006.
41. Robert J. Keith, “The Marketing Revolution,” Journal of
Marketing 24 (January 1960), pp. 35–38; John B.
McKitterick, “What Is the Marketing Management
Concept?” Frank M. Bass, ed., The Frontiers of
Marketing Thought and Action (Chicago: American
Marketing Association, 1957), pp. 71–82; Fred J.
Borch, “The Marketing Philosophy as a Way of
Business Life,” The Marketing Concept: Its Meaning to
Management (Marketing series, no. 99; New York:
American Management Association, 1957), pp. 3–5.
42. Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Myopia,” Harvard
Business Review, July–August 1960, p. 50.
43. Rohit Deshpande and John U. Farley, “Measuring Market
Orientation: Generalization and Synthesis,” Journal of
Market-Focused Management 2 (1998), pp. 213–32; Ajay
K. Kohli and Bernard J. Jaworski, “Market Orientation:
The Construct, Research Propositions, and Managerial
Implications,” Journal of Marketing 54 (April 1990), pp.
1–18; John C. Narver and Stanley F. Slater, “The Effect of
a Market Orientation on Business Profitability,” Journal of
Marketing 54 (October 1990), pp. 20–35.
44. Evert Gummesson, Total Relationship Marketing
(Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999); Regis
McKenna, Relationship Marketing (Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1991); Martin Christopher, Adrian
Payne, and David Ballantyne, Relationship Marketing:
Bringing Quality, Customer Service, and Marketing
Together (Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1991).
E2

Endnotes

45. James C. Anderson, Hakan Hakansson, and Jan
Johanson, “Dyadic Business Relationships within a
Business Network Context,” Journal of Marketing 58
(October 15, 1994), pp. 1–15.
46. Larry Selden and Yoko S. Selden, “Profitable
Customer: The Key to Great Brands,” Advertising Age,
July 10, 2006, p. S7; Larry Selden and Geoffrey Colvin,
Angel Customers and Demon Customers (New York,
NY: Portfolio, 2003).
47. Allison Fass, “Theirspace.com,” Forbes, May 8, 2006,
pp. 122–24.
48. Paula Andruss, “Employee Ambassadors, Marketing
News, December 15, 2008, pp. 26–27;
www.snowshoemtn.com.
49. Christian Homburg, John P. Workman Jr., and Harley
Krohmen, “Marketing’s Influence within the Firm,”
Journal of Marketing 63 (January 1999), pp. 1–15.
50. Robert Shaw and David Merrick, Marketing Payback: Is
Your Marketing Profitable? (London, UK: Pearson
Education, 2005).
51. Rajendra Sisodia, David Wolfe, and Jagdish Sheth,
Firms of Endearment: How World-Class Companies
Profit from Passion (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton
School Publishing, 2007).
52. If choosing to develop a strategic corporate social
responsibility program, see Michael E. Porter and Mark
R. Kramer, “Strategy and Society: The Link between
Competitive Advantage and Corporate Social
Responsibility,” Harvard Business Review, December
2006, pp. 78–92.
53. Jeffrey Hollender and Stephen Fenichell, What Matters
Most (New York: Basic Books, 2004), p. 168.
54. Tara Weiss, “Special Report: Going Green,”
Forbes.com, July 3, 2007; Matthew Grimm,
“Progressive Business,” Brandweek, November 28,
2005, pp. 16–26.
55. E. Jerome McCarthy and William D. Perreault, Basic
Marketing: A Global-Managerial Approach, 14th ed.
(Homewood, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2002).
56. Joann Muller, “Ford: Why It’s Worse Than You Think,”
BusinessWeek, June 25, 2001; Ford 1999 Annual
Report; Greg Keenan, “Six Degrees of Perfection,”
Globe and Mail, December 20, 2000.

Chapter 2
1. Catherine Holahan, “Yahoo!’s Bid to Think Small,”
BusinessWeek, February 26, 2007, p. 94; Ben Elgin,
“Yahoo!’s Boulevard of Broken Dreams,” BusinessWeek,
March 13, 2006, pp. 76–77; Justin Hibbard, “How
Yahoo! Gave Itself a Face-Lift,” BusinessWeek, October
9, 2006, pp. 74–77; Kevin J. Delaney, “As Yahoo!
Falters, Executive’s Memo Calls for Overhaul,” Wall
Street Journal, November 18, 2006; “Yahoo!’s
Personality Crisis,” Economist, August 13, 2005,
pp. 49–50; Fred Vogelstein, “Yahoo!’s Brilliant Solution,”
Fortune, August 8, 2005, pp. 42–55.
2. Nirmalya Kumar, Marketing as Strategy: The CEO’s
Agenda for Driving Growth and Innovation (Boston:

Harvard Business School Press, 2004); Frederick E.
Webster Jr., “The Future Role of Marketing in the
Organization,” Donald R. Lehmann and Katherine
Jocz, eds., Reflections on the Futures of Marketing
(Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 1997),
pp. 39–66.
3. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating
and Sustaining Superior Performance (New York: Free
Press, 1985).
4. For an academic treatment of benchmarking, see
Douglas W. Vorhies and Neil A. Morgan,
“Benchmarking Marketing Capabilities for Sustained
Competitive Advantage,” Journal of Marketing 69
(January 2005), pp. 80–94.
5. Michael Hammer and James Champy, Reengineering
the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution
(New York: Harper Business, 1993).
6. Ibid.; Jon R. Katzenbach and Douglas K. Smith, The
Wisdom of Teams: Creating the High-Performance
Organization (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1993).
7. Sachi Izumi, “Sony to Halve Suppliers,” Reuters,
May 21, 2009.
8. C. K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel, “The Core
Competence of the Corporation,” Harvard Business
Review, May–June 1990, pp. 79–91.
9. George S. Day, “The Capabilities of Market-Driven
Organizations,” Journal of Marketing 58 (October
1994), p. 38.
10. George S. Day and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, Peripheral
Vision: Detecting the Weak Signals That Will Make or
Break Your Company (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press, 2006); Paul J. H. Schoemaker
and George S. Day, “How to Make Sense of Weak
Signals,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring
2009), pp. 81–89.
11. “Kodak Plans to Cut Up to 5,000 More Jobs,”
Bloomberg News, February 8, 2007; Leon Lazaroff,
“Kodak’s Big Picture Focusing on Image Change,”
Chicago Tribune, January 29, 2006.
12. Pew Internet and American Life Project Survey,
November–December 2000.
13. Peter Drucker, Management: Tasks, Responsibilities
and Practices (New York: Harper and Row, 1973),
chapter 7.
14. Kawasaki also humorously suggests checking out
comic strip character Dilbert’s mission statement
generator first if one has to be developed by the
organization: Dilbert.com.
15. The Economist: Business Miscellany (London: Profile
Books Ltd, 2005), pp. 32–33.
16. Peter Freedman, “The Age of the Hollow Company,”
TimesOnline, April 25, 2004; Pew Internet and American
Life Project Survey, November–December 2000.
17. Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski,
e-commerce (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), p. 116.
18. Tilman Kemmler, Monika Kubicová, Robert Musslewhite,
and Rodney Prezeau, “E-Performance II—The Good,

the Bad, and the Merely Average,” an exclusive to
mckinseyquarterly.com, 2001.
19. Bruce Horovitz, “Campbell’s 10-Year Goal to Clean Up
a Soupy Mess,” USA Today, January 26, 2009, p. 1B.
20. Dorothy Pomerantz, “Leading Man,” Forbes, May 19,
2008, p. 82–97; Shira Ovide, “Ad Slump, Web
Charges Hurt News Corp.,” Wall Street Journal,
August 6, 2009, p. B4.
21. This section is based on Robert M. Grant,
Contemporary Strategy Analysis, 7th ed. (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 2009), chapter 17.
22. Tom Lowry, “ESPN’s Cell Phone Fumble,”
BusinessWeek, October 30, 2006, p. 26.
23. Jesse Eisinger, “The Marriage from Hell,” Condé Nast
Portfolio, February 2008, pp. 84–88, 132.
24. Tim Goodman, “NBC Everywhere?” San Francisco
Chronicle, September 4, 2003.
25. Jon Fortt, “Mark Hurd, Superstar,” Fortune, June 9,
2008, pp. 35–40.
26. Jena McGregor, “The World’s Most Innovative
Companies,” BusinessWeek, April 24, 2006, pp. 63–74.
27. E. Jerome McCarthy, Basic Marketing: A Managerial
Approach, 12th ed. (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1996).
28. Paul J. H. Shoemaker, “Scenario Planning: A Tool for
Strategic Thinking,” Sloan Management Review (Winter
1995), pp. 25–40.
29. Ronald Grover, “Hollywood Ponders a Post-DVD
Future, BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, p. 56; Brooks
Barnes, “Movie Studios See a Threat in Growth of
Redbox,” New York Times, September 7, 2009.
30. Philip Kotler, Kotler on Marketing (New York: Free
Press, 1999).
31. Ibid.
32. Phaedra Hise, “Was It Time to Go Downmarket?” Inc.,
September 2006, p. 47; Patrick J. Sauer, “Returning to
Its Roots,” Inc., November 2007; www.loanbright.com.
33. Dominic Dodd and Ken Favaro, “Managing the Right
Tension,” Harvard Business Review, December 2006,
pp. 62–74.
34. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for
Analyzing Industries and Competitors (New York: Free
Press, 1980), chapter 2.
35. Michael E. Porter, “What Is Strategy?” Harvard Business
Review, November–December 1996, pp. 61–78.
36. For some readings on strategic alliances, see John R.
Harbison and Peter Pekar, Smart Alliances: A
Practical Guide to Repeatable Success (San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1998); Peter Lorange
and Johan Roos, Strategic Alliances: Formation,
Implementation and Evolution (Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell, 1992); Jordan D. Lewis, Partnerships for
Profit: Structuring and Managing Strategic Alliances
(New York: Free Press, 1990).
37. Bharat Book Bureau, Strategic Alliances in World
Pharma and Biotech Markets, May 2008.
38. Kerry Capell, “Vodafone: Embracing Open Source
with Open Arms,” BusinessWeek, April 20, 2009,
Endnotes

E3

pp. 52–53; “Call the Carabiniere,” The Economist, May
16, 2009, p. 75.
39. Robin Cooper and Robert S. Kalpan, “Profit Priorities
from Activity-Based Costing,” Harvard Business
Review, May–June 1991, pp. 130–135.
40. See Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton, The
Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy into Action
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1996) as a
tool for monitoring stakeholder satisfaction.
41. Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr., In
Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best-Run
Companies (New York: Harper and Row, 1982), pp. 9–12.
42. John P. Kotter and James L. Heskett, Corporate
Culture and Performance (New York: Free Press, 1992);
Stanley M. Davis, Managing Corporate Culture
(Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1984); Terrence E. Deal and
Allan A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures: The Rites and
Rituals of Corporate Life (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
1982); “Corporate Culture,” BusinessWeek, October
27, 1980, pp. 148–160.
43. Marian Burk Wood, The Marketing Plan: A Handbook
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003).
44. Donald R. Lehmann and Russell S. Winer, Product
Management, 3rd ed. (Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2001).
45. David B. Hertz, “Risk Analysis in Capital Investment,”
Harvard Business Review, January–February 1964,
pp. 96–106.

Chapter 3
1. Susan Warren, “Pillow Talk: Stackers Outnumber
Plumpers; Don’t Mention Drool,” Wall Street Journal,
January 8, 1998.
2. Ronald D. Michman, Edward M. Mazze, and Alan J.
Greco, Lifestyle Marketing: Reaching the New
American Consumer (Westport: Praeger, 2008).
3. “Insights,” Nielsen, www.claritas.com/target-marketing/
resources/case-study/michigan-economic-developmentcorp.jsp.
4. “Mobile Access to Inventory Data Reduces Back
Orders by 80 Percent,” www.microsoft.com/
casestudies; “Smarter Supply Chain Utilization for the
Retailer,” www.microsoft.com/casestudies; “Ten Ways
to Reduce Inventory While Maintaining or Improving
Service,” www.microsoft.com/casestudies.
5. “Vendor-Managed Inventory in Consumer Electronics
and Durables,” The Supply Chain Company,
www.i2.com/industries/consumer_industries/vmi/
vmi_case_study.cfm.
6. William Holstein, “The Dot Com within Ford,”
BusinessWeek, January 30, 2000.
7. Mara Der Hovanesian, “Wells Fargo,” BusinessWeek,
November 24, 2004, p. 96.
8. Jeff Zabin, “The Importance of Being Analytical,”
Brandweek, July 24, 2006, p. 21; Stephen Baker,
“Math Will Rock Your World,” BusinessWeek, January
23, 2006, pp. 54–62; Michelle Kessler and Byron
Acohido, “Data Miners Dig a Little Deeper,” USA
Today, July 11, 2006.
E4

Endnotes

9. Leonard M. Fuld, “Staying a Step Ahead of the Rest,”
Chief Executive 218 (June 2006), p. 32.
10. “Spies, Lies & KPMG,” BusinessWeek, February 26,
2007.
11. Jennifer Esty, “Those Wacky Customers!” Fast
Company, January 2004, p. 40.
12. Helen Coster, “Shopping Cart Psychology,” Forbes,
September 7, 2009, pp. 64–65.
13. Sara Steindorf, “Shoppers Spy on Those Who Serve,”
Christian Science Monitor, May 28, 2002; Edward F.
McQuarrie, Customer Visits: Building a Better Market
Focus, 2nd ed. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press, 1998).
14. Shirely S. Wang, “Heath Care Taps ‘Mystery
Shoppers,’” Wall Street Journal, August 10, 2006.
15. Heather Green, “It Takes a Web Village,” Business
Week, September 4, 2006, p. 66.
16. Amy Merrick, “Counting on the Census,” Wall Street
Journal, February 14, 2001.
17. Kim Girard, “Strategies to Turn Stealth into Wealth,”
Business 2.0, May 2003, p. 66.
18. “The Blogs in the Corporate Machine,” The Economist,
February 11, 2006, pp. 55–56; also adapted from Robin
T. Peterson and Zhilin Yang, “Web Product Reviews
Help Strategy,” Marketing News, April 7, 2004, p. 18.
19. American Productivity & Quality Center, “User-Driven
Competitive Intelligence: Crafting the Value
Proposition,” December 3–4, 2002.
20. Alex Wright, “Mining the Web for Feelings, Not Facts,”
New York Times, August 24, 2009; Sarah E. Needleman,
“For Companies, a Tweet in Time Can Avert PR Mess,
Wall Street Journal, August 3, 2009, p. B6.
21. See BadFads Museum, www.badfads.com, for
examples of fads and collectibles through the years.
22. Katy McLaunghlin, “Macaroni Grill’s Order: Cut
Calories, Keep Customers,” Wall Street Journal,
September 16, 2009, p. B6.
23. John Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene, Megatrends 2000
(New York: Avon Books, 1990).
24. Indata, IN (June 2006), p. 27.
25. World POPClock, U.S. Census Bureau,
www.census.gov, 2009.
26. See Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, and
Jorgen Randers, Beyond Limits (White River Junction, VT:
Chelsea Green, 1993) for some commentary;
http://geography.about.com/od/obtainpopulationdata/
a/worldvillage.htm.
27. “World Development Indicators Database,” World Bank,
http://site resources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/
Resources/POP.pdf, September 15, 2009; “World
Population Growth,” www.worldbank. org/depweb/
english/beyond/beyondco/beg_03.pdf.
28. Andrew Zolli, “Demographics: The Population
Hourglass,” Fast Company, www.fastcompany.com/
magazine/103/open_essay-demographics.html,
December 19, 2007.
29. Brian Grow, “Hispanic Nation,” BusinessWeek, March
15, 2004, pp. 58–70.

30. Queena Sook Kim, “Fisher-Price Reaches for
Hispanics,” Wall Street Journal, November 1, 2004.
31. For descriptions on the buying habits and marketing
approaches to African Americans and Hispanics, see
M. Isabel Valdes, Marketing to American Latinos: A
Guide to the In-Culture Approach, Part II (Ithaca, NY:
Paramount Market Publishing, 2002); Alfred L.
Schreiber, Multicultural Marketing (Lincolnwood, IL: NTC
Business Books, 2001).
32. Jacquelyn Lynn, “Tapping the Riches of Bilingual
Markets,” Management Review, March 1995,
pp. 56–61; Mark R. Forehand and Rohit Deshpandé,
“What We See Makes Us Who We Are: Priming Ethnic
Self-Awareness and Advertising Response,” Journal of
Marketing Research 38 (August 2001), pp. 336–48.
33. Tennille M. Robinson, “Tapping into Black Buying
Power,” Black Enterprise 36 (January 2006), p. 64.
34. The Central Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook,
www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook,
December 9, 2010.
35. “Projections of the Number of Households and
Families in the United States: 1995–2010, P25–1129,”
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census,
www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p25-1129.pdf,
December 9, 2010.
36. Michelle Conlin, “Unmarried America,” BusinessWeek,
October 20, 2003, pp. 106–116; James Morrow, “A
Place for One,” American Demographics, November
2003, pp. 25–30.
37. Rebecca Gardyn, “A Market Kept in the Closet,”
American Demographics, November 2001, pp. 37–43.
38. Nanette Byrnes, “Secrets of the Male Shopper,”
BusinessWeek, September 4, 2006, p. 44.
39. Elisabeth Sullivan, “The Age of Prudence,” Marketing
News, April 15, 2009, pp. 8–11; Steve Hamm, “The
New Age of Frugality,” BusinessWeek, October 20,
2008, pp. 55–60; Jessica Deckler, “Never Pay Retail
Again,” CNNMoney.com, May 30, 2008.
40. David Welch, “The Incredible Shrinking Boomer
Economy,” BusinessWeek, August 3, 2009, pp. 27–30.
41. Julie Schlosser, “Infosys U.,” Fortune, March 20, 2006,
pp. 41–42.
42. Pamela Paul, “Corporate Responsibility,” American
Demographics, May 2002, pp. 24–25.
43. Stephen Baker, “Wiser about the Web,” BusinessWeek,
March 27, 2006, pp. 53–57.
44. “Clearing House Suit Chronology,” Associated Press,
January 26, 2001; Paul Wenske, “You Too Could Lose
$19,000!” Kansas City Star, October 31, 1999.
45. Laura Zinn, “Teens: Here Comes the Biggest Wave
Yet,” BusinessWeek, April 11, 2004, pp. 76–86.
46. Chris Taylor (ed.), “Go Green. Get Rich.” Business 2.0,
January/February 2007, pp. 68–79.
47. Subhabrata Bobby Banerjee, Easwar S. Iyer, and Rajiv
K Kashyap, “Corporate Enviromentalism: Antecedents
and Influence of Industry Type,” Journal of Marketing
67 (April 2003), pp. 106–22.

48. Chris Taylor, ed., “Go Green. Get Rich.” Business 2.0,
January/February 2007, pp. 68–79.
49. See Dorothy Cohen, Legal Issues on Marketing
Decision Making (Cincinnati: South-Western, 1995).
50. Rebecca Gardyn, “Swap Meet,” American
Demographics, July 2001, pp. 51–55.
51. Pamela Paul, “Mixed Signals,” American
Demographics, July 2001, pp. 45–49.
52. Conference Summary, “Excelling in Today’s Multimedia
World,” Economist Conferences’ Fourth Annual
Marketing Roundtable, Landor, March 2006.
53. For a good discussion and illustration, see Roger J.
Best, Market-Based Management, 4th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005).
54. For further discussion, see Gary L. Lilien, Philip Kotler,
and K. Sridhar Moorthy, Marketing Models (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992).
55. www.naics.com; www.census.gov/epcd/naics02,
December 9, 2010.
56. Stanley F. Slater and Eric M. Olson, “Mix and Match,”
Marketing Management, July–August 2006, pp. 32–37;
Brian Sternthal and Alice M. Tybout, “Segmentation and
Targeting,” Dawn Iacobucci, ed., Kellogg on Marketing
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001), pp. 3–30.
57. Stephanie Clifford, “Measuring the Results of an Ad Right
Down to the City Block,” New York Times, August 5, 2009.
58. For an excellent overview of market forecasting, see
Scott Armstrong, ed., Principles of Forecasting: A
Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners (Norwell,
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001) and his Web
site: www.forecastingprinciples.com; Also see Roger J.
Best, “An Experiment in Delphi Estimation in Marketing
Decision Making,” Journal of Marketing Research 11
(November 1974), pp. 447–52; Norman Dalkey and
Olaf Helmer, “An Experimental Application of the
Delphi Method to the Use of Experts,” Management
Science, April 1963, pp. 458–67.

Chapter 4
1. Jia Lynn Yang, “The Bottom Line,” Fortune, September 1,
2008, pp. 107–12 Jack Neff, “From Mucus to Maxi
Pads: Marketing’s Dirtiest Jobs,” Advertising Age,
February 16, 2009, p. 9.
2. See Robert Schieffer, Ten Key Customer Insights:
Unlocking the Mind of the Market (Mason, OH: Thomson,
2005) for a comprehensive, in-depth discussion of how
to generate customer insights to drive business results.
3. Jenn Abelson, “Gillette Sharpens Its Focus on
Women,” Boston Globe, January 4, 2009; A.G. Lafley,
interview, “It Was a No-Brainer,” Fortune, February 21,
2005, p. 96; Naomi Aoki, “Gillette Hopes to Create a
Buzz with Vibrating Women’s Razor,” Boston Globe,
December 17, 2004; Chris Reidy, “The Unveiling of a
New Venus,” Boston Globe, November 3, 2000.
4. Natalie Zmuda, “Tropicana Line’s Sales Plunge 20%
Post-Rebranding,” Advertising Age, April 2, 2009.
5. “2009 Global Market Research Report,” Esomar,
www.esomar.org.
Endnotes

E5

6. Melanie Haiken, “Tuning In to Crowdcasting,”
Business 2.0, November 2006, pp. 66–68.
7. Michael Fielding, “Special Delivery: UPS Conducts
Surveys to Help Customers Export to China,”
Marketing News, February 1, 2007, pp. 13–14.
8. “Would You Fly in Chattering Class?” The Economist,
September 9, 2006, p. 63.
9. For some background information on in-flight Internet
service, see “Boeing In-Flight Internet Plan Goes
Airborne,” Associated Press, April 18, 2004; John Blau,
“In-Flight Internet Service Ready for Takeoff,” IDG
News Service, June 14, 2002; “In-Flight Dogfight,”
Business2.com, January 9, 2001, pp. 84–91.
10. For a discussion of the decision-theory approach to
the value of research, see Donald R. Lehmann, Sunil
Gupta, and Joel Steckel, Market Research (Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997).
11. Gregory Solman, “Finding Car Buyers at Their Home
(sites),” Adweek, August 21–28, 2006, p. 8.
12. Linda Tischler, “Every Move You Make,” Fast Company,
April 2004, pp. 73–75; Allison Stein Wellner, “Look
Who’s Watching,” Continental, April 2003, pp. 39–41.
13. For a detailed review of some relevant academic
work, see Eric J. Arnould and Amber Epp, “Deep
Engagement with Consumer Experience,” Rajiv Grover
and Marco Vriens, eds., Handbook of Marketing
Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
2006); For a range of academic discussion, see the
following special issue, “Can Ethnography Uncover
Richer Consumer Insights?” Journal of Advertising
Research 46 (September 2006); For some practical
tips, see Richard Durante and Michael Feehan,
“Leverage Ethnography to Improve Strategic Decision
Making,” Marketing Research (Winter 2005).
14. Eric J. Arnould and Linda L. Price, “Market-Oriented
Ethnography Revisited,” Journal of Advertising
Research 46 (September 2006), pp. 251–62; Eric J.
Arnould and Melanie Wallendorf, “Market-Oriented
Ethnography: Interpretation Building and Marketing
Strategy Formulation,” Journal of Marketing Research
31 (November 1994), pp. 484–504.
15. “Case Study: Bank of America,” Inside Innovation,
BusinessWeek, June 19, 2006; Spencer E. Ante,
“Inprogress,” IN, June 2006, pp. 28–29; Bank of
America, www.bankofamerica.com.
16. Helen Coster, “Shopping Cart Psychology,” Forbes,
September 7, 2009, pp. 64–65.
17. Andrew Kaplan, “Mass Appeal,” Beverage World,
February 2007, pp. 48–49.
18. Michael Fielding, “Shift the Focus,” Marketing News,
September 1, 2006, pp. 18–20.
19. Piet Levy, “In with the Old, in Spite of the New,”
Marketing News, May 30, 2009, p. 19.
20. Eric Schellhorn, “A Tsunami of Surveys Washes over
Consumers,” Christian Science Monitor, October 2,
2006, p. 13.
21. Catherine Marshall and Gretchen B. Rossman,
Designing Qualitative Research, 4th ed. (Thousand
E6

Endnotes

Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006); Bruce L. Berg,
Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences,
6th ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2006); Norman K.
Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln, eds., The Sage
Handbook of Qualitative Research, 3rd ed. (Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2005); Linda Tischler,
“Every Move You Make,” Fast Company, April 2004,
pp. 73–75.
22. Paula Andruss, “Keeping Both Eyes on Quality,”
Marketing News, September 15, 2008, pp. 22–23.
23. Louise Witt, “Inside Intent,” American Demographics,
March 2004, pp. 34–39; Andy Raskin, “A Face Any
Business Can Trust,” Business 2.0, December 2003,
pp. 58–60; Gerald Zaltman, “Rethinking Market
Research: Putting People Back In,” Journal of
Marketing Research 34 (November 1997), pp. 424–37;
Wally Wood, “The Race to Replace Memory,”
Marketing and Media Decisions, July 1986, pp. 166–67;
Roger D. Blackwell, James S. Hensel, Michael B.
Phillips, and Brian Sternthal, Laboratory Equipment for
Marketing Research (Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1970);
Laurie Burkitt, “Battle for the Brain,” Forbes, November
16, 2009, pp. 76–77.
24. Stephen Baker, “Wiser about the Web,” BusinessWeek,
March 27, 2006, pp. 54–62.
25. Michael Fielding, “Shift the Focus,” Marketing News,
September 1, 2006, pp. 18–20; Aaron Ukodie,
“Worldwide Mobile Phones Reach Four Billion 2008,”
allAfrica.com, http://allafrica.com/stories/
200810070774.html, October 6, 2008.
26. Kelly K. Spors, “The Customer Knows Best,” Wall
Street Journal, July 13, 2009, p. R5; Susan Kristoff,
“Local Motors Breaking Design Rules in Engineering,”
www.suite.com, October 22, 2009; Emily Sweeney,
“Machine Dream,” Boston Globe, February 1, 2009.
27. Bradley Johnson, “Forget Phone and Mail: Online’s the
Best Place to Administer Surveys,” Advertising Age,
July 17, 2006, p. 23.
28. Emily Steel, “The New Focus Groups: Online Networks
Proprietary Panels Help Consumer Companies Shape
Products, Ads,” Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2008.
29. Elisabeth A. Sullivan, “Delve Deeper,” Marketing News,
April 15, 2008, p. 24.
30. Kate Maddox, “The ROI of Research,” BtoB, pp. 25, 28.
31. Bradley Johnson, “Online Methods Upend Consumer
Survey Business,” Advertising Age, July 17, 2006.
32. “Survey: Internet Should Remain Open to All,”
ConsumerAffairs.com, www.consumeraffairs.com/
news04/2006/01/internet_survey.html, January 25,
2006; “Highlights from the National Consumers
League’s Survey on Consumers and Communications
Technologies: Current and Future Use,”
www.nclnet.org/research/utilities/telecom_highlights.
htm, July 21, 2005; Catherine Arnold, “Not Done Net;
New Opportunities Still Exist in Online Research,”
Marketing News, April 1, 2004, p. 17; Louella Miles,
“Online, on Tap,” Marketing, June 16, 2004, pp. 39–40;
Suzy Bashford, “The Opinion Formers,” Revolution,
May 2004, pp. 42–46; Nima M. Ray and Sharon W.

Tabor, “Contributing Factors; Several Issues Affect
e-Research Validity,” Marketing News, September 15,
2003, p. 50; Bob Lamons, “Eureka! Future of B-to-B
Research Is Online,” Marketing News, September
24, 2001, pp. 9–10; Burt Helm, “Online Polls: How
Good Are They?” BusinessWeek, June 16, 2008,
pp. 86–87.
33. The Nielsen Company, www.nielsen.com.
34. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Qual Research by the Numb3rs,”
Marketing News, September 1, 2008.
35. Deborah L. Vence, “In an Instant: More Researchers
Use IM for Fast, Reliable Results,” Marketing News,
March 1, 2006, pp. 53–55.
36. Catherine Arnold, “Global Perspective: Synovate Exec
Discusses Future of International Research,” Marketing
News, May 15, 2004, p. 43; Michael Erard, “For
Technology, No Small World after All,” New York Times,
May 6, 2004; Deborah L. Vence, “Global Consistency:
Leave It to the Experts,” Marketing News, April 28,
2003, p. 37.
37. Jim Stachura and Meg Murphy, “Multicultural
Marketing: Why One Size Doesn’t Fit All,”
MarketingProfs.com, October 25, 2005.
38. Michael Fielding, “Global Insights: Synovate’s Chedore
Discusses MR Trends,” Marketing News, May 15,
2006, pp. 41–42.
39. Kevin J. Clancy and Peter C. Krieg, Counterintuitive
Marketing: How Great Results Come from Uncommon
Sense (New York: Free Press, 2000).
40. See “Special Issue on Managerial Decision Making,”
Marketing Science 18 (1999) for some contemporary
perspectives; See also John D. C. Little, “Decision
Support Systems for Marketing Managers,” Journal of
Marketing 43 (Summer 1979), p. 11.
41. Marketing News can be found at
www.marketingpower.com.
42. Rajiv Grover and Marco Vriens, “Trusted Advisor: How
It Helps Lay the Foundation for Insight,” Handbook of
Marketing Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 2006), pp. 3–17; Christine Moorman,
Gerald Zaltman, and Rohit Deshpandé, “Relationships
between Providers and Users of Market Research: The
Dynamics of Trust within and between Organizations,”
Journal of Marketing Research 29 (August 1992),
pp. 314–28.
43. The Advertising Research Foundation,
www.thearf.org/assets/ogilvy-09.
44. Adapted from Arthur Shapiro, “Let’s Redefine Market
Research,” Brandweek, June 21, 2004, p. 20; Kevin
Ohannessian, “Star Wars: Thirty Years of Success,”
Fast Company, May 29, 2007.
45. Karen V. Beaman, Gregory R. Guy, and Donald E.
Sexton, “Managing and Measuring Return on
Marketing Investment,” The Conference Board
Research Report R-1435-08-RR, 2008.
46. “Report: Marketers Place Priority on Nurturing Existing
Customers,” http://directmag.com/roi/0301-customersatisfaction-retention.

47. Factor TG, www.factortg.com/ideas/CMO_MPM_
Audit__cmo.pdf.
48. Paul Farris, Neil T. Bendle, Phillip E. Pfeifer, and David
J. Reibstein, Marketing Metrics: 50+ Metrics Every
Executive Should Master (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Education, 2006); John Davis, Magic Numbers
for Consumer Marketing: Key Measures to Evaluate
Marketing Success (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons,
2005).
49. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Measure Up,” Marketing News,
May 30, 2009, pp. 8–11.
50. Michael Krauss, “Which Metrics Matter Most?”
Marketing News, February 28, 2009, p. 20.
51. Tim Ambler, Marketing and the Bottom Line: The New
Methods of Corporate Wealth, 2nd ed. (London:
Pearson Education, 2003).
52. Kusum L. Ailawadi, Donald R. Lehmann, and Scott A.
Neslin, “Revenue Premium as an Outcome Measure of
Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing 67 (October 2003),
pp. 1–17.
53. Tim Ambler, Marketing and the Bottom Line: The New
Methods of Corporate Wealth, 2nd ed. (London:
Pearson Education, 2003).
54. Josh Bernoff, “Measure What Matters,” Marketing
News, December 15, 2008, p. 22; and information from
Servus Credit Union, May 2010.
55. Gerard J. Tellis, “Modeling Marketing Mix,” Rajiv Grover
and Marco Vriens, eds., Handbook of Marketing Research
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006).
56. Jack Neff, “P&G, Clorox Rediscover Modeling,”
Advertising Age, March 29, 2004, p. 10.
57. Laura Q. Hughes, “Econometrics Take Root,”
Advertising Age, August 5, 2002, p. S-4.
58. David J. Reibstein, “Connect the Dots,” CMO
Magazine, May 2005.
59. Jeff Zabin, “Marketing Dashboards: The Visual Display
of Marketing Data,” Chief Marketer, June 26, 2006.
60. Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton, The Balanced
Scorecard (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1996).
61. Spencer Ante, “Giving the Boss the Big Picture,”
BusinessWeek, February 13, 2006, pp. 48–50.

Chapter 5
1. Louis Columbus, “Lessons Learned in Las Vegas:
Loyalty Programs Pay,” CRM Buyer, July 29, 2005;
Oskar Garcia, “Harrah’s Broadens Customer Loyalty
Program; Monitors Customer Behavior,” Associated
Press, September 27, 2008; Dan Butcher, “Harrah’s
Casino Chain Runs Mobile Coupon Pilot,” Mobile
Marketer, November 19, 2008; Michael Bush, “Why
Harrah’s Loyalty Effort Is Industry’s Gold Standard,”
Advertising Age, October 5, 2009, p. 8.
2. Robert Schieffer, Ten Key Consumer Insights (Mason,
OH: Thomson, 2005).
3. Don Peppers and Martha Rogers, “Customers Don’t
Grow on Trees,” Fast Company, July 2005, pp. 25–26.
Endnotes

E7

4. For discussion of some of the issues involved, see
Glen Urban, Don’t Just Relate—Advocate (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education Wharton School
Publishing, 2005).
5. See Glen L. Urban and John R. Hauser, “‘Listening
In’ to Find and Explore New Combinations of
Customer Needs,” Journal of Marketing 68
(April 2004), pp. 72–87.
6. “Customer reviews drive 196% increase in paid
search revenue for Office Depot,” Bazaarvoice, www.
bazaarvoice.com/cs_rr_adresults_ officedepot.html, 2008.
7. Glen L. Urban, “The Emerging Era of Customer
Advocacy,” Sloan Management Review 45 (2004),
pp. 77–82.
8. Steven Burke, “Dell’s vs. HP’s Value,” CRN, May 15,
2006, p. 46; David Kirkpatrick, “Dell in the Penalty Box,”
Fortune, September 18, 2006, p. 70.
9. Michael Bush, “Consumers Rate Brands that Give
Best Bang for Buck,” Advertising Age, November 3,
2008, p. 8.
10. Irwin P. Levin and Richard D. Johnson, “Estimating
Price–Quality Tradeoffs Using Comparative
Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research 11
(June 1984), pp. 593–600. Customer-perceived value
can be measured as a difference or as a ratio. If total
customer value is $20,000 and total customer cost is
$16,000, then the customer-perceived value is $4,000
(measured as a difference) or 1.25 (measured as a
ratio). Ratios that are used to compare offers are often
called value–price ratios.
11. Alex Taylor, “Caterpillar: Big Trucks, Big Sales, Big
Attitude,” Fortune, August 20, 2007, pp. 48–53; Tim
Kelly, “Squash the Caterpillar,” Forbes, April 21, 2008,
pp. 136–41; Jeff Borden, “Eat My Dust,” Marketing
News, February 1, 2008, pp. 20–22.
12. For more on customer-perceived value, see David C.
Swaddling and Charles Miller, Customer Power (Dublin,
OH: Wellington Press, 2001).
13. Gary Hamel, “Strategy as Revolution,” Harvard
Business Review, July–August 1996, pp. 69–82.
14. “2010 Brand Keys Customer Loyalty Engagement
Index,” Brand Keys, Inc.
15. Michael J. Lanning, Delivering Profitable Value (Oxford,
UK: Capstone, 1998).
16. Vikas Mittal, Eugene W. Anderson, Akin Sayrak, and
Pandu Tadilamalla, “Dual Emphasis and the Long-Term
Financial Impact of Customer Satisfaction,” Marketing
Science 24 (Fall 2005), pp. 544–55.
17. Michael Tsiros, Vikas Mittal, and William T. Ross Jr.,
“The Role of Attributions in Customer Satisfaction: A
Reexamination,” Journal of Consumer Research 31
(September 2004), pp. 476–83; for a succinct review,
see Richard L. Oliver, “Customer Satisfaction
Research,” Rajiv Grover and Marco Vriens, eds.,
Handbook of Marketing Research (Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, 2006), pp. 569–87.
18. For some provocative analysis and discussion, see
Praveen K. Kopalle and Donald R. Lehmann, “Setting
E8

Endnotes

Quality Expectations when Entering a Market: What
Should the Promise Be?” Marketing Science 25
(January–February 2006), pp. 8–24; Susan Fournier
and David Glenmick, “Rediscovering Satisfaction,”
Journal of Marketing 63 (October 1999), pp. 5–23.
19. Jennifer Aaker, Susan Fournier, and S. Adam Brasel,
“When Good Brands Do Bad,” Journal of Consumer
Research 31 (June 2004), pp. 1–16; Pankaj Aggrawal,
“The Effects of Brand Relationship Norms on Consumer
Attitudes and Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research
31 (June 2004), pp. 87–101.
20. For in-depth discussion, see Michael D. Johnson
and Anders Gustafsson, Improving Customer
Satisfaction, Loyalty, and Profit (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2000).
21. For an interesting analysis of the effects of different
types of expectations, see William Boulding, Ajay
Kalra, and Richard Staelin, “The Quality Double
Whammy,” Marketing Science 18 (April 1999),
pp. 463–84.
22. Neil A. Morgan, Eugene W. Anderson, and Vikas Mittal,
“Understanding Firms’ Customer Satisfaction
Information Usage,” Journal of Marketing 69 (July
2005), pp. 131–51.
23. Although for moderating factors, see Kathleen Seiders,
Glenn B. Voss, Dhruv Grewal, and Andrea L. Godfrey,
“Do Satisfied Customers Buy More? Examining
Moderating Influences in a Retailing Context,” Journal
of Marketing 69 (October 2005), pp. 26–43.
24. See, for example, Christian Homburg, Nicole
Koschate, and Wayne D. Hoyer, “Do Satisfied
Customers Really Pay More? A Study of the
Relationship between Customer Satisfaction and
Willingness to Pay,” Journal of Marketing 69 (April
2005), pp. 84–96.
25. Claes Fornell, Sunil Mithas, Forrest V. Morgeson III,
and M. S. Krishnan, “Customer Satisfaction and
Stock Prices: High Returns, Low Risk,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (January 2006), pp. 3–14. See also,
Thomas S. Gruca and Lopo L. Rego, “Customer
Satisfaction, Cash Flow, and Shareholder Value,”
Journal of Marketing 69 (July 2005), pp. 115–30;
Eugene W. Anderson, Claes Fornell, and Sanal K.
Mazvancheryl, “Customer Satisfaction and
Shareholder Value,” Journal of Marketing 68
(October 2004), pp. 172–85.
26. Thomas O. Jones and W. Earl Sasser Jr., “Why Satisfied
Customers Defect,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1995, pp. 88–99.
27. Companies should also note that managers and
salespeople can manipulate customer satisfaction
ratings. They can be especially nice to customers just
before the survey. They can also try to exclude
unhappy customers. Another danger is that if
customers know the company will go out of its way to
please them, some may express high dissatisfaction in
order to receive more concessions.
28. Jennifer Rooney, “Winning Hearts and Minds,”
Advertising Age, July 10, 2006, pp. S10–13.

29. For an empirical comparison of different methods to
measure customer satisfaction, see Neil A. Morgan
and Lopo Leotto Rego, “The Value of Different
Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty Metrics in
Predicting Business Performance,” Marketing
Science 25 (September–October 2006), pp. 426–39.
30. Frederick K. Reichheld, “The One Number You Need
to Grow,” Harvard Business Review, December 2003,
pp. 46–54.
31. James C. Ward and Amy L. Ostrom, “Complaining to
the Masses: The Role of Protest Framing in CustomerCreated Complaint Sites,” Journal of Consumer
Research 33 (September 2006), pp. 220–30; Kim Hart,
“Angry Customers Use Web to Shame Firms,”
Washington Post, July 5, 2006.
32. Eugene W. Anderson and Claes Fornell, “Foundations
of the American Customer Satisfaction Index,” Total
Quality Management 11 (September 2000),
pp. S869–82; Claes Fornell, Michael D. Johnson,
Eugene W. Anderson, Jaaesung Cha, and Barbara
Everitt Bryant, “The American Customer Satisfaction
Index: Nature, Purpose, and Findings,” Journal of
Marketing 60 (October 1996), pp. 7–18.
33. Technical Assistance Research Programs (Tarp), U.S.
Office of Consumer Affairs Study on Complaint
Handling in America, 1986.
34. Stephen S. Tax and Stephen W. Brown, “Recovering
and Learning from Service Failure,” Sloan
Management Review 40 (Fall 1998), pp. 75–88; Ruth
Bolton and Tina M. Bronkhorst, “The Relationship
between Customer Complaints to the Firm and
Subsequent Exit Behavior,” Advances in Consumer
Research, vol. 22 (Provo, UT: Association for
Consumer Research, 1995), pp. 94–100; Roland T.
Rust, Bala Subramanian, and Mark Wells, “Making
Complaints a Management Tool,” Marketing
Management 1 (March 1992), pp. 40–45;
Karl Albrecht and Ron Zemke, Service America!
(Homewood, IL: Dow Jones–Irwin, 1985),
pp. 6–7.
35. Christian Homburg and Andreas Fürst, “How
Organizational Complaint Handling Drives Customer
Loyalty: An Analysis of the Mechanistic and the
Organic Approach,” Journal of Marketing 69 (July
2005), pp. 95–114.
36. Philip Kotler, Kotler on Marketing (New York: Free
Press, 1999), pp. 21–22.
37. “Basic Concepts,” ASQ, www.asq.org/glossary/q.html,
January 16, 2010.
38. Robert D. Buzzell and Bradley T. Gale, “Quality Is King,”
The PIMS Principles: Linking Strategy to Performance
(New York: Free Press, 1987), pp. 103–34. (PIMS
stands for Profit Impact of Market Strategy.)
39. Brian Hindo, “Satisfaction Not Guaranteed,”
BusinessWeek, June 19, 2006, pp. 32–36.
40. Jena McGregor, “Putting Home Depot’s House in
Order,” BusinessWeek, May 14, 2009; “Home Depot
CEO,” Sorry We Let You Down,” MSN Money,
www.moneycentral.msn.com, March 13, 2007.

41. Lerzan Aksoy, Timothy L. Keiningham, and Terry G.
Vavra, “Nearly Everything You Know about Loyalty Is
Wrong,” Marketing News, October 1, 2005, pp. 20–21;
Timothy L. Keiningham, Terry G. Vavra, Lerzan Aksoy,
and Henri Wallard, Loyalty Myths (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2005).
42. Werner J. Reinartz and V. Kumar, “The Impact of
Customer Relationship Characteristics on Profitable
Lifetime Duration,” Journal of Marketing 67 (January
2003), pp. 77–99; Werner J. Reinartz and V. Kumar,
“On the Profitability of Long-Life Customers in a
Noncontractual Setting: An Empirical Investigation and
Implications for Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 64
(October 2000), pp. 17–35.
43. Rakesh Niraj, Mahendra Gupta, and Chakravarthi
Narasimhan, “Customer Profitability in a Supply
Chain,” Journal of Marketing 65 (July 2001), pp. 1–16.
44. Thomas M. Petro, “Profitability: The Fifth ‘P’ of
Marketing,” Bank Marketing, September 1990,
pp. 48–52; “Who Are Your Best Customers?” Bank
Marketing, October 1990, pp. 48–52.
45. “Easier Than ABC,” Economist, October 25, 2003,
p. 56; Robert S. Kaplan and Steven R. Anderson,
Time-Driven Activity Based Costing (Boston MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 2007); “Activity-Based
Accounting” Economist, June 29, 2009.
46. V. Kumar, “Customer Lifetime Value,” Rajiv Grover and
Marco Vriens, eds., Handbook of Marketing Research
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006),
pp. 602–27; Sunil Gupta, Donald R. Lehmann, and
Jennifer Ames Stuart, “Valuing Customers,” Journal of
Marketing Research 61 (February 2004), pp. 7–18;
Rajkumar Venkatesan and V. Kumar, “A Customer
Lifetime Value Framework for Customer Selection and
Resource Allocation Strategy,” Journal of Marketing 68
(October 2004), pp. 106–25.
47. V. Kumar, “Profitable Relationships,” Marketing
Research 18 (Fall 2006), pp. 41–46.
48. For some recent analysis and discussion, see Michael
Haenlein, Andreas M. Kaplan, and Detlef Schoder,
“Valuing the Real Option of Abandoning Unprofitable
Customers when Calculating Customer Lifetime Value,”
Journal of Marketing 70 (July 2006), pp. 5–20; Teck-Hua
Ho, Young-Hoon Park, and Yong-Pin Zhou,
“Incorporating Satisfaction into Customer Value
Analysis: Optimal Investment in Lifetime Value,”
Marketing Science 25 (May–June 2006), pp. 260–77;
and Peter S. Fader, Bruce G. S. Hardie, and Ka Lok
Lee, “RFM and CLV: Using Iso-Value Curves for
Customer Base Analysis,” Journal of Marketing
Research 62 (November 2005), pp. 415–30; V. Kumar,
Rajkumar Venkatesan, Tim Bohling, and Denise
Beckmann, “The Power of CLV: Managing Customer
Lifetime Value at IBM,” Marketing Science 27 (2008),
pp. 585–99.
49. Nicole E. Coviello, Roderick J. Brodie, Peter J.
Danaher, and Wesley J. Johnston, “How Firms Relate
to Their Markets: An Empirical Examination of
Contemporary Marketing Practices,” Journal of
Endnotes

E9

Marketing 66 (July 2002), pp. 33–46. For a
comprehensive set of articles from a variety of
perspectives on brand relationships, see Deborah J.
MacInnis, C. Whan Park, and Joseph R. Preister, eds.,
Handbook of Brand Relationships (Armonk, NY: M. E.
Sharpe, 2009).
50. For an up-to-date view of academic perspectives,
see the articles contained in the Special Section on
Customer Relationship Management, Journal of
Marketing 69 (October 2005). For a study of the
processes involved, see Werner Reinartz, Manfred
Kraft, and Wayne D. Hoyer, “The Customer
Relationship Management Process: Its Measurement
and Impact on Performance,” Journal of Marketing
Research 61 (August 2004), pp. 293–305.
51. Nora A. Aufreiter, David Elzinga, and Jonathan W.
Gordon, “Better Branding,” The McKinsey Quarterly 4
(2003), pp. 29–39.
52. Michael J. Lanning, Delivering Profitable Value (New
York: Basic Books, 1998).
53. Kenneth Hein, “Satisfying a Publicity Jones with Hemp,
Love Potions,” Brandweek, March 13, 2006, p. 14;
Corporate Design Foundation, “Keep Up with the
Jones, Dude!” BusinessWeek, October 26, 2005; Ryan
Underwood, “Jones Soda Secret,” Fast Company,
March 2005, p. 74; Maggie Overfelt, “Cult Brand
Jones Soda Fights for Survival,” CNNMoney.com,
October 10, 2008.
54. Susan Stellin, “For Many Online Companies, Customer
Service Is Hardly a Priority,” New York Times, February
19, 2001; Michelle Johnson, “Getting Ready for the
Onslaught,” Boston Globe, November 4, 1999.
55. Julie Jargon, “Domino’s IT Staff Delivers Slick Site,
Ordering System,” Wall Street Journal, November 24,
2009; Bruce Horovitz, “Where’s Your Domino’s Pizza?
Track It Online,” USA Today, January 30, 2008; Domino’s
Pizza, www.dominosbiz.com, January 16, 2010.
56. James H. Donnelly Jr., Leonard L. Berry, and Thomas
W. Thompson, Marketing Financial Services—A
Strategic Vision (Homewood, IL: Dow Jones–Irwin,
1985), p. 113.
57. Seth Godin, Permission Marketing: Turning Strangers
into Friends, and Friends into Customers (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1999). See also Susan Fournier,
Susan Dobscha, and David Mick, “Preventing the
Premature Death of Relationship Marketing,”
Harvard Business Review, January–February 1998,
pp. 42–51.
58. Don Peppers and Martha Rogers, One-to-One B2B:
Customer Development Strategies for the Business-toBusiness World (New York: Doubleday, 2001); Peppers
and Rogers, The One-to-One Future: Building
Relationships One Customer at a Time (London: Piatkus
Books, 1996); Don Peppers and Martha Rogers, The
One-to-One Manager: Real-World Lessons in Customer
Relationship Management (New York: Doubleday,
1999); Don Peppers, Martha Rogers, and Bob Dorf,
The One-to-One Fieldbook: The Complete Toolkit for
Implementing a One-to-One Marketing Program (New
E10

Endnotes

York: Bantam, 1999); Don Peppers and Martha Rogers,
Enterprise One to One: Tools for Competing in the
Interactive Age (New York: Currency, 1997).
59. Mark Rechtin, “Aston Martin Woos Customers One by
One,” Automotive News, March 28, 2005.
60. Stuart Elliott, “Letting Consumers Control Marketing:
Priceless,” New York Times, October 9, 2006; Todd
Wasserman and Jim Edwards, “Marketers’ New World
Order,” Brandweek, October 9, 2006, pp. 4–6; Heather
Green and Robert D. Hof, “Your Attention Please,”
BusinessWeek, July 24, 2006, pp. 48–53; Brian
Sternberg, “The Marketing Maze,” Wall Street Journal,
July 10, 2006.
61. Rob Walker, “Amateur Hour, Web Style,” Fast
Company, October 2007, p. 87.
62. Ben McConnell and Jackie Huba, “Learning to
Leverage the Lunatic Fringe,” Point, July–August 2006,
pp. 14–15; Michael Krauss, “Work to Convert
Customers into Evangelists,” Marketing News,
December 15, 2006, p. 6; Ben McConnell and Jackie
Huba, Creating Customer Evangelists: How Loyal
Customers Become a Loyal Sales Force (New York:
Kaplan Business, 2003).
63. Jonah Bloom, “The New Realities of a Low Trust
Marketing World,” Advertising Age, February 13,
2006.
64. Mylene Mangalindan, “New Marketing Style: Clicks
and Mortar,” Wall Street Journal, December 21, 2007,
p. B5.
65. Nick Wingfield, “High Scores Matter to Game Makers,
Too,” Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2007, p. B1.
66. Candice Choi, “Bloggers Serve Up Opinions,”
Associated Press, March 23, 2008.
67. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Consider Your Source,” Marketing
News, February 15, 2008, pp. 16–19; Mylene
Mangalindan, “Web Stores Tap Product Reviews,” Wall
Street Journal, September 11, 2007.
68. Erick Schonfeld, “Rethinking the Recommendation
Engine,” Business 2.0, July 2007, pp. 40–43.
69. Michael Lewis, “Customer Acquisition Promotions and
Customer Asset Value,” Journal of Marketing Research
63 (May 2006), pp. 195–203.
70. Hamish Pringle and Peter Field, “Why Customer
Loyalty Isn’t as Valuable as You Think,” Advertising
Age, March 23, 2009, p. 22.
71. Werner Reinartz, Jacquelyn S. Thomas, and V. Kumar,
“Balancing Acquisition and Retention Resources to
Maximize Customer Profitability,” Journal of Marketing
69 (January 2005), pp. 63–79.
72. “Service Invention to Increase Retention,” CMO
Council, August 3, 2009, www.cmocouncil.org.
73. Frederick F. Reichheld, “Learning from Customer
Defections,” Harvard Business Review, March–April
1996, pp. 56–69.
74. Frederick F. Reichheld, Loyalty Rules (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 2001); Frederick F. Reichheld,
The Loyalty Effect (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1996).

75. Michael D. Johnson, and Fred Selnes, “Diversifying
Your Customer Portfolio,” MIT Sloan Management
Review 46 (Spring 2005), pp. 11–14.
76. Tom Ostenon, Customer Share Marketing (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002); Alan W. H. Grant
and Leonard A. Schlesinger, “Realize Your Customer’s
Full Profit Potential,” Harvard Business Review,
September–October 1995, pp. 59–72.
77. Gail McGovern and Youngme Moon, “Companies and
the Customers Who Hate Them,” Harvard Business
Review, June 2007, pp. 78–84.
78. Elisabeth A. Sullivan, “Just Say No,” Marketing News,
April 15, 2008, p. 17.
79. Sunil Gupta and Carl F. Mela, “What Is a Free
Customer Worth,” Harvard Business Review,
November 2008, pp. 102–9.
80. Leonard L. Berry and A. Parasuraman, Marketing
Services: Computing through Quality (New York: Free
Press, 1991), pp. 136–42. For an academic
examination in a business-to-business context, see
Robert W. Palmatier, Srinath Gopalakrishna, and Mark
B. Houston, “Returns on Business-to-Business
Relationship Marketing Investments: Strategies for
Leveraging Profits,” Marketing Science 25
(September–October 2006), pp. 477–93.
81. Frederick F. Reichheld, “Learning from Customer
Defections,” Harvard Business Review, March 3, 2009,
pp. 56–69.
82. Mike White and Teresa Siles, email message, July 14,
2008.
83. Ben McConnell and Jackie Huba, “Learning to
Leverage the Lunatic Fringe,” Point, July–August 2006,
pp. 14–15; Michael Krauss, “Work to Convert
Customers into Evangelists,” Marketing News,
December 15, 2006, p. 6; Ben McConnell and Jackie
Huba, Creating Customer Evangelists: How Loyal
Customers Become a Loyal Sales Force (New York:
Kaplan Business, 2003).
84. Utpal M. Dholakia, “How Consumer SelfDetermination Influences Relational Marketing
Outcomes: Evidence from Longitudinal Field
Studies,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(February 2006), pp.109–20.
85. Allison Enright, “Serve Them Right,” Marketing News,
May 1, 2006, pp. 21–22.
86. For a review, see Grahame R. Dowling and Mark
Uncles, “Do Customer Loyalty Programs Really Work?”
Sloan Management Review 38 (Summer 1997),
pp. 71–82.
87. Thomas Lee, “Retailers Look for a Hook,” St. Louis
Post-Dispatch, December 4, 2004.
88. Joseph C. Nunes and Xavier Drèze, “Feeling Superior:
The Impact of Loyalty Program Structure on
Consumers’ Perception of Status,” Journal of
Consumer Research 35 (April 2009), pp. 890–905;
Joseph C. Nunes and Xavier Drèze, “Your Loyalty
Program Is Betraying You,” Harvard Business Review,
April 2006, pp. 124–31.

89. Adam Lashinsky, “The Decade of Steve Jobs,”
Fortune, November 23, 2009, pp. 93–100; Apple,
www.apple.com, January 16, 2010; Peter Burrows,
“Apple vs. Google,” BusinessWeek, January 25, 2010,
pp. 28–34.
90. Jacquelyn S. Thomas, Robert C. Blattberg, and
Edward J. Fox, “Recapturing Lost Customers,”
Journal of Marketing Research 61 (February 2004),
pp. 31–45.
91. Werner Reinartz and V. Kumar, “The Impact of
Customer Relationship Characteristics on Profitable
Lifetime Duration,” Journal of Marketing 67 (January
2003), pp. 77–99; Werner Reinartz and V. Kumar,
“The Mismanagement of Customer Loyalty,” Harvard
Business Review, July 2002, pp. 86–97.
92. V. Kumar, Rajkumar Venkatesan, and Werner Reinartz,
“Knowing What to Sell, When, and to Whom,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2006, pp. 131–37.
93. Jeff Zabin, “The Importance of Being Analytical,”
Brandweek, July 24, 2006, p. 21. Stephen Baker,
“Math Will Rock Your World,” BusinessWeek, January
23, 2006, pp. 54–62. Michelle Kessler and Byron
Acohido, “Data Miners Dig a Little Deeper,” USA
Today, July 11, 2006.
94. Burt Heim, “Getting Inside the Customer’s Mind,”
BusinessWeek, September 22, 2008, p. 88; Mike Duff,
“Dunnhumby Complicates Outlook for Tesco, Kroger,
Wal-Mart,” bnet.com, January 13, 2009; Sarah
Mahoney, “Macy’s Readies New Marketing Strategy,
Hires Dunnhumby,” Marketing Daily, August 14, 2008.
95. Christopher R. Stephens and R. Sukumar, “An
Introduction to Data Mining,” Rajiv Grover and Marco
Vriens, eds., Handbook of Marketing Research (Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006), pp. 455–86;
Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar,
Introduction to Data Mining (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Addison Wesley, 2005); Michael J. A. Berry and Gordon
S. Linoff, Data Mining Techniques: For Marketing, Sales,
and Customer Relationship Management, 2nd ed.
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Computer, 2004); James Lattin,
Doug Carroll, and Paul Green, Analyzing Multivariate Data
(Florence, KY: Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2003).
96. George S. Day, “Creating a Superior CustomerRelating Capability,” Sloan Management Review 44
(Spring 2003), pp. 77–82.
97. Ibid; George S. Day, “Creating a Superior CustomerRelating Capability,” MSI Report No. 03–101
(Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 2003);
“Why Some Companies Succeed at CRM (and Many
Fail),” Knowledge at Wharton, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn. edu, January 15, 2003.
98. Werner Reinartz and V. Kumar, “The Mismanagement
of Customer Loyalty,” Harvard Business Review, July
2002, pp. 86–94; Susan M. Fournier, Susan Dobscha,
and David Glen Mick, “Preventing the Premature Death
of Relationship Marketing,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1998, pp. 42–51.
99. Jon Swartz, “Ebay Faithful Expect Loyalty in Return,”
USA Today, July 1, 2002.
Endnotes

E11

Chapter 6
1. “Lego’s Turnaround: Picking Up the Pieces,” The
Economist, October 28, 2006, p. 76; Paul Grimaldi,
“Consumers Design Products Their Way,” Knight
Ridder Tribune Business News, November 25, 2006;
Michael A. Prospero, Fast Company, September 2005,
p. 35; David Robertson and Per Hjuler, “Innovating a
Turnaround at LEGO,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2009, pp. 20–21; Kim Hjelmgaard, “Lego,
Refocusing on Bricks, Builds on Image,” Wall Street
Journal, December 24, 2009.
2. Michael R. Solomon, Consumer Behavior: Buying,
Having, and Being, 9th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2011).
3. Leon G. Schiffman and Leslie Lazar Kanuk, Consumer
Behavior, 10th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2010).
4. For some classic perspectives, see Richard P.
Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social
Class to Marketing,” Journal of Consumer Research
10 (December 1983), pp. 265–80; Richard P. Coleman
and Lee P. Rainwater, Social Standing in America:
New Dimension of Class (New York: Basic Books,
1978).
5. Leon G. Schiffman and Leslie Lazar Kanuk, Consumer
Behavior, 10th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2010).
6. Kimberly L. Allers, “Retail’s Rebel Yell,” Fortune,
November 10, 2003, p. 137; Kate Rockwood, “Rock
Solid,” Fast Company, September 2009, pp. 44–48.
7. Elizabeth S. Moore, William L. Wilkie, and Richard J.
Lutz, “Passing the Torch: Intergenerational Influences
as a Source of Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing 66
(April 2002), pp. 17–37; Robert Boutilier, “Pulling the
Family’s Strings,” American Demographics, August
1993, pp. 44–48; David J. Burns, “Husband-Wife
Innovative Consumer Decision Making: Exploring the
Effect of Family Power,” Psychology & Marketing
(May–June 1992), pp. 175–89; Rosann L. Spiro,
“Persuasion in Family Decision Making,” Journal of
Consumer Research 9 (March 1983), pp. 393–402. For
cross-cultural comparisons of husband–wife buying
roles, see John B. Ford, Michael S. LaTour, and Tony L.
Henthorne, “Perception of Marital Roles in PurchaseDecision Processes: A Cross-Cultural Study,” Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 23 (Spring 1995),
pp. 120–31.
8. Kay M. Palan and Robert E. Wilkes, “AdolescentParent Interaction in Family Decision Making,” Journal
of Consumer Research 24 (March 1997),
pp. 159–69; Sharon E. Beatty and Salil Talpade,
“Adolescent Influence in Family Decision Making:
A Replication with Extension,” Journal of Consumer
Research 21 (September 1994), pp. 332–41.
9. Chenting Su, Edward F. Fern, and Keying Ye, “A
Temporal Dynamic Model of Spousal Family
Purchase-Decision Behavior,” Journal of Marketing
Research 40 (August 2003), pp. 268–81.

E12

Endnotes

10. Hillary Chura, “Failing to Connect: Marketing
Messages for Women Fall Short,” Advertising Age,
September 23, 2002, pp. 13–14.
11. Valentyna Melnyk, Stijn M. J. van Osselaer, and Tammo
H. A. Bijmolt, “Are Women More Loyal Customers Than
Men? Gender Differences in Loyalty to Firms and
Individual Service Providers,” Journal of Marketing 73
(July 2009), pp. 82–96.
12. Michele Miller, The Soccer Mom Myth (Austin, TX:
Wizard Academy Press, 2008).
13. “YouthPulse: The Definitive Study of Today’s Youth
Generation,” Harris Interactive,
www.harrisinteractive.com, January 29, 2010.
14. Dana Markow, “Today’s Youth: Understanding Their
Importance and Influence,” Trends & Tudes 7, no. 1,
www.harrisinteractive.com, February 2008.
15. Deborah Roedder John, “Consumer Socialization of
Children: A Retrospective Look at Twenty-Five Years of
Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 26
(December 1999), pp. 183–213; Lan Nguyen Chaplin
and Deborah Roedder John, “The Development of
Self-Brand Connections in Children and Adolescents,”
Journal of Consumer Research 32 (June 2005),
pp. 119–29; Lan Nguyen Chaplin and Deborah
Roedder John, “Growing Up in a Material World:
Age Differences in Materialism in Children and
Adolescents,” Journal of Consumer Research 34
(December 2007), pp. 480–93.
16. “Families and Living Arrangements,” U.S. Census
Bureau, www.census.gov/population/www/
socdemo/hh-fam.html, January 29, 2010.
17. Rex Y. Du and Wagner A. Kamakura, “Household Life
Cycles and Lifestyles in the United States,” Journal of
Marketing Research 48 (February 2006), pp. 121–32;
Lawrence Lepisto, “A Life Span Perspective of
Consumer Behavior,” Elizabeth Hirshman and Morris
Holbrook, eds., Advances in Consumer Research,
vol. 12 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research,
1985), p. 47; Also see Gail Sheehy, New Passages:
Mapping Your Life across Time (New York: Random
House, 1995).
18. Brooks Barnes and Monica M. Clark, “Tapping into
the Wedding Industry to Sell Broadway Seats,” Wall
Street Journal, July 3, 2006; “Columbus, Ga.–Based
Bank Targets Newlyweds for Online Banking,”
Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News, March 2,
2000.
19. Nicole Perlroth, “Survival of the Fittest,” Forbes,
January 12, 2009, pp. 54–55; “Snap Fitness Opens
1000th Club,” Club Solutions, December 17, 2009;
Becky Ebenkamp, “Snap Fitness Offers Leaner Gym
Experience,” Brandweek, January 24, 2009; Aim
Jefferson, “A Snap of a Grand Opening: Snap
Fitness, West Milford, NorthJersey.com,
www.northjersey.com, January 8, 2010.
20. Harold H. Kassarjian and Mary Jane Sheffet,
“Personality and Consumer Behavior: An Update,”
Harold H. Kassarjian and Thomas S. Robertson, eds.,

Perspectives in Consumer Behavior (Glenview, IL:
Scott Foresman, 1981), pp. 160–80.
21. Jennifer Aaker, “Dimensions of Measuring Brand
Personality,” Journal of Marketing Research 34
(August 1997), pp. 347–56.
22. Jennifer L. Aaker, Veronica Benet-Martinez, and Jordi
Garolera, “Consumption Symbols as Carriers of
Culture: A Study of Japanese and Spanish Brand
Personality Constructs,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 81 (March 2001), pp. 492–508.
23. Yongjun Sung and Spencer F. Tinkham, “Brand
Personality Structures in the United States and Korea:
Common and Culture-Specific Factors,” Journal of
Consumer Psychology 15 (December 2005),
pp. 334–50.
24. M. Joseph Sirgy, “Self Concept in Consumer Behavior:
A Critical Review,” Journal of Consumer Research 9
(December 1982), pp. 287–300.
25. Timothy R. Graeff, “Consumption Situations and the
Effects of Brand Image on Consumers’ Brand
Evaluations,” Psychology & Marketing 14 (January
1997), pp. 49–70; Timothy R. Graeff, “Image
Congruence Effects on Product Evaluations: The Role
of Self-Monitoring and Public/Private Consumption,”
Psychology & Marketing 13 (August 1996),
pp. 481–99.
26. Jennifer L. Aaker, “The Malleable Self: The Role of
Self-Expression in Persuasion,” Journal of Marketing
Research 36 (February 1999), pp. 45–57.
27. Neal Templin, “Boutique-Hotel Group Thrives on
Quirks,” Wall Street Journal, March 18, 1999; Chip
Conley, The Rebel Rules (New York: Fireside, 2001);
Tom Osborne, “What Is Your Band Personality,” Viget
Inspire, www.viget.com, February 2, 2009; Alice Z.
Cuneo, “Magazines as Muses: Hotelier Finds
Inspiration in Titles such as Wired,” Advertising Age,
November 6, 2006, p. 10.
28. “LOHAS Forum Attracts Fortune 500 Companies,”
Environmental Leader, June 22, 2009.
29. Toby Weber, “All Three? Gee,” Wireless Review, May
2003, pp. 12–14.
30. Noel C. Paul, “Meal Kits in Home,” Christian Science
Monitor, June 9, 2003, p. 13; Anne D’Innocenzio,
“Frugal Times: Hamburger Helper, Kool-Aid in
Advertising Limelight,” Associated Press, Seattle
Times, April 29, 2009.
31. For a review of academic research on consumer
behavior, see Barbara Loken, “Consumer Psychology:
Categorization, Inferences, Affect, and Persuasion,”
Annual Review of Psychology 57 (2006), pp. 453–95.
To learn more about how consumer behavior theory
can be applied to policy decisions, see “Special Issue
on Helping Consumers Help Themselves: Improving
the Quality of Judgments and Choices,” Journal of
Public Policy & Marketing 25 (Spring 2006).
32. Thomas J. Reynolds and Jonathan Gutman,
“Laddering Theory, Method, Analysis, and
Interpretation,” Journal of Advertising Research

(February–March 1988), pp. 11–34; Thomas J.
Reynolds and Jerry C. Olson, Understanding
Consumer Decision-Making: The Means-Ends
Approach to Marketing and Advertising (Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 2001); Brian Wansink, “Using
Laddering to Understand and Leverage a Brand’s
Equity,” Qualitative Market Research 6 (2003).
33. Ernest Dichter, Handbook of Consumer Motivations
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).
34. Jan Callebaut et al., The Naked Consumer: The Secret
of Motivational Research in Global Marketing (Antwerp,
Belgium: Censydiam Institute, 1994).
35. Melanie Wells, “Mind Games,” Forbes, September 1,
2003, p. 70.
36. Clotaire Rapaille, “Marketing to the Reptilian Brain,”
Forbes, July 3, 2006; Clotaire Rapaille, The Culture
Code (New York: Broadway Books, 2007).
37. Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New
York: Harper & Row, 1954), pp. 80–106. For an
interesting business application, see Chip Conley,
Peak: How Great Companies Get Their Mojo from
Maslow (San Francisco: Jossey Bass 2007).
38. See Frederick Herzberg, Work and the Nature of Man
(Cleveland: William Collins, 1966); Thierry and
Koopman-Iwema, “Motivation and Satisfaction,” P. J.
D. Drenth, H. Thierry, P. J. Willems, and C. J. de Wolff,
eds., A Handbook of Work and Organizational
Psychology (East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press,
1984), pp. 141–42.
39. Bernard Berelson and Gary A. Steiner, Human
Behavior: An Inventory of Scientific Findings (New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1964), p. 88.
40. J. Edward Russo, Margaret G. Meloy, and Victoria
Husted Medvec, “The Distortion of Product Information
during Brand Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research
35 (November 1998), pp. 438–52.
41. Leslie de Chernatony and Simon Knox, “How an
Appreciation of Consumer Behavior Can Help in
Product Testing,” Journal of Market Research Society
(July 1990), p. 333. See also, Chris Janiszewski and
Stiju M. J. Osselar, “A Connectionist Model of
Brand–Quality Association,” Journal of Marketing
Research 37 (August 2000), pp. 331–51.
42. Florida’s Chris Janiszewski has conducted fascinating
research looking at preconscious processing effects.
See Chris Janiszewski, “Preattentive Mere Exposure
Effects,” Journal of Consumer Research 20 (December
1993), pp. 376–92, as well as some of his earlier and
subsequent research. For more perspectives, see also
John A. Bargh and Tanya L. Chartrand, “The
Unbearable Automaticity of Being,” American
Psychologist 54 (1999), pp. 462–79 and the research
programs of both authors. For lively academic debate,
see the “Research Dialogue” section of the July 2005
issue of the Journal of Consumer Psychology.
43. See Timothy E. Moore, “Subliminal Advertising: What
You See Is What You Get,” Journal of Marketing 46
(Spring 1982), pp. 38–47 for an early classic

Endnotes

E13

discussion; and Andrew B. Aylesworth, Ronald C.
Goodstein, and Ajay Kalra, “Effect of Archetypal
Embeds on Feelings: An Indirect Route to Affecting
Attitudes?” Journal of Advertising 28 (Fall 1999),
pp. 73–81 for additional discussion.
44. Patricia Winters Lauro, “An Emotional Connection
between Sleeper and Mattress,” New York Times, July 5,
2007.
45. Ellen Byron, “Tide, Woolite Tout Their Fashion Sense,”
Wall Street Journal, March 11, 2009.
46. Robert S. Wyer Jr. and Thomas K. Srull, “Person
Memory and Judgment,” Psychological Review 96
(January 1989), pp. 58–83; John R. Anderson, The
Architecture of Cognition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1983).
47. For additional discussion, see John G. Lynch Jr. and
Thomas K. Srull, “Memory and Attentional Factors in
Consumer Choice: Concepts and Research Methods,”
Journal of Consumer Research 9 (June 1982),
pp. 18–36; and Joseph W. Alba, J. Wesley Hutchinson,
and John G. Lynch Jr., “Memory and Decision Making,”
Harold H. Kassarjian and Thomas S. Robertson, eds.,
Handbook of Consumer Theory and Research
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992), pp. 1–49.
48. Robert S. Lockhart, Fergus I. M. Craik, and Larry
Jacoby, “Depth of Processing, Recognition, and
Recall,” John Brown, ed., Recall and Recognition (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1976); Fergus I. M. Craik and
Endel Tulving, “Depth of Processing and the Retention
of Words in Episodic Memory,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology 104 (September 1975), pp. 268–94; Fergus
I. M. Craik and Robert S. Lockhart, “Levels of
Processing: A Framework for Memory Research,”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11
(1972), pp. 671–84.
49. Leonard M. Lodish, Magid Abraham, Stuart
Kalmenson, Jeanne Livelsberger, Beth Lubetkin, Bruce
Richardson, and Mary Ellen Stevens, “How T.V.
Advertising Works: A Meta-Analysis of 389 Real World
Split Cable T.V. Advertising Experiments,” Journal of
Marketing Research 32 (May 1995), pp. 125–39.
50. Elizabeth F. Loftus and Gregory R. Loftus, “On the
Permanence of Stored Information in the Human Brain,”
American Psychologist 35 (May 1980), pp. 409–20.
51. For a comprehensive review of the academic literature
on decision making, see J. Edward Russo and Kurt A.
Carlson, “Individual Decision Making,” Bart Weitz and
Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London:
Sage Publications, 2002), pp. 372–408.
52. Benson Shapiro, V. Kasturi Rangan, and John Sviokla,
“Staple Yourself to an Order,” Harvard Business Review,
July–August 1992, pp. 113–22. See also, Carrie M.
Heilman, Douglas Bowman, and Gordon P. Wright, “The
Evolution of Brand Preferences and Choice Behaviors
of Consumers New to a Market,” Journal of Marketing
Research 37 (May 2000), pp. 139–55.
53. Marketing scholars have developed several models
of the consumer buying process through the years.
See Mary Frances Luce, James R. Bettman, and
E14

Endnotes

John W. Payne, Emotional Decisions: Tradeoff
Difficulty and Coping in Consumer Choice (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2001); James F. Engel,
Roger D. Blackwell, and Paul W. Miniard, Consumer
Behavior, 8th ed. (Fort Worth, TX: Dryden, 1994);
John A. Howard and Jagdish N. Sheth, The Theory
of Buyer Behavior (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1969).
54. William P. Putsis Jr. and Narasimhan Srinivasan,
“Buying or Just Browsing? The Duration of Purchase
Deliberation,” Journal of Marketing Research 31
(August 1994), pp. 393–402.
55. Chem L. Narayana and Rom J. Markin, “Consumer
Behavior and Product Performance: An Alternative
Conceptualization,” Journal of Marketing 39 (October
1975), pp. 1–6. See also, Lee G. Cooper and Akihiro
Inoue, “Building Market Structures from Consumer
Preferences,” Journal of Marketing Research 33
(August 1996), pp. 293–306; Wayne S. DeSarbo and
Kamel Jedidi, “The Spatial Representation of
Heterogeneous Consideration Sets,” Marketing
Science 14 (Summer 1995), pp. 326–42.
56. For a market-structure study of the hierarchy of
attributes in the coffee market, see Dipak Jain, Frank
M. Bass, and Yu-Min Chen, “Estimation of Latent
Class Models with Heterogeneous Choice
Probabilities: An Application to Market Structuring,”
Journal of Marketing Research 27 (February 1990),
pp. 94–101. For an application of means-end chain
analysis to global markets, see Frenkel Ter Hofstede,
Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, and Michel Wedel,
“International Market Segmentation Based on
Consumer–Product Relations,” Journal of Marketing
Research 36 (February 1999), pp. 1–17.
57. Virginia Postrel, “The Lessons of the Grocery Shelf
Also Have Something to Say about Affirmative Action,”
New York Times, January 30, 2003.
58. David Krech, Richard S. Crutchfield, and Egerton L.
Ballachey, Individual in Society (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1962), chapter 2.
59. Seth Stevenson, “Like Cardboard,” Slate, January 11,
2010; Ashley M. Heher, “Domino’s Comes Clean with
New Pizza Ads,” Associated Press, January 11, 2010;
Bob Garfield, “Domino’s Does Itself a Disservice by
Coming Clean about Its Pizza,” Advertising Age,
January 11, 2010; Domino’s Pizza,
www.pizzaturnaround.com.
60. See Leigh McAlister, “Choosing Multiple Items from a
Product Class,” Journal of Consumer Research 6
(December 1979), pp. 213–24; Paul E. Green and
Yoram Wind, Multiattribute Decisions in Marketing: A
Measurement Approach (Hinsdale, IL: Dryden, 1973),
chapter 2; Richard J. Lutz, “The Role of Attitude
Theory in Marketing,” H. Kassarjian and T. Robertson,
eds., Perspectives in Consumer Behavior (Lebanon, IN:
Scott Foresman, 1981), pp. 317–39.
61. This expectancy-value model was originally developed
by Martin Fishbein, “Attitudes and Prediction of
Behavior,” Martin Fishbein, ed., Readings in Attitude

Theory and Measurement (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1967), pp. 477–92; For a critical review, see Paul
W. Miniard and Joel B. Cohen, “An Examination of the
Fishbein-Ajzen Behavioral-Intentions Model’s
Concepts and Measures,” Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology (May 1981), pp. 309–39.
62. Michael R. Solomon, Consumer Behavior: Buying,
Having, and Being, 9th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2011).
63. James R. Bettman, Eric J. Johnson, and John W.
Payne, “Consumer Decision Making,” Kassarjian and
Robertson, eds., Handbook of Consumer Theory and
Research (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice
Hall, 1991), pp. 50–84.
64. Jagdish N. Sheth, “An Investigation of Relationships
among Evaluative Beliefs, Affect, Behavioral
Intention, and Behavior,” John U. Farley, John A.
Howard, and L. Winston Ring, eds., Consumer
Behavior: Theory and Application (Boston: Allyn &
Bacon, 1974), pp. 89–114.
65. Martin Fishbein, “Attitudes and Prediction of Behavior,”
M. Fishbein, ed., Readings in Attitude Theory and
Measurement (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1967),
pp. 477–492.
66. Andrew Hampp, “How ‘Paranormal Activity,’ Hit It Big,”
Advertising Age, October 12, 2009.
67. Margaret C. Campbell and Ronald C. Goodstein, “The
Moderating Effect of Perceived Risk on Consumers’
Evaluations of Product Incongruity: Preference for the
Norm,” Journal of Consumer Research 28 (December
2001), pp. 439–49; Grahame R. Dowling, “Perceived
Risk,” Peter E. Earl and Simon Kemp, eds., The Elgar
Companion to Consumer Research and Economic
Psychology (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 1999),
pp. 419–24; Grahame R. Dowling, “Perceived Risk:
The Concept and Its Measurement,” Psychology and
Marketing 3 (Fall 1986), pp. 193–210; James R.
Bettman, “Perceived Risk and Its Components: A
Model and Empirical Test,” Journal of Marketing
Research 10 (May 1973), pp. 184–90; Raymond A.
Bauer, “Consumer Behavior as Risk Taking,” Donald F.
Cox, ed., Risk Taking and Information Handling in
Consumer Behavior (Boston: Division of Research,
Harvard Business School, 1967).
68. Richard L. Oliver, “Customer Satisfaction Research,”
Rajiv Grover and Marco Vriens, eds., Handbook of
Marketing Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 2006), pp. 569–87.
69. Ralph L. Day, “Modeling Choices among Alternative
Responses to Dissatisfaction,” Advances in Consumer
Research 11 (1984), pp. 496–99. Also see Philip Kotler
and Murali K. Mantrala, “Flawed Products: Consumer
Responses and Marketer Strategies,” Journal of
Consumer Marketing (Summer 1985), pp. 27–36.
70. Albert O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970).
71. John D. Cripps, “Heuristics and Biases in Timing the
Replacement of Durable Products,” Journal of
Consumer Research 21 (September 1994), pp. 304–18.

72. Ben Paytner, “From Trash to Cash,” Fast Company,
February 2009, p. 44.
73. Richard E. Petty, Communication and Persuasion:
Central and Peripheral Routes to Attitude Change
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986); Richard E. Petty
and John T. Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion:
Classic and Contemporary Approaches (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1981).
74. For an overview of some issues involved, see James
R. Bettman, Mary Frances Luce, and John W. Payne,
“Constructive Consumer Choice Processes,” Journal
of Consumer Research 25 (December 1998),
pp. 187–217; and Itamar Simonson, “Getting Closer
to Your Customers by Understanding How They
Make Choices,” California Management Review 35
(Summer 1993), pp. 68–84. For examples of classic
studies in this area, see some of the following: Dan
Ariely and Ziv Carmon, “Gestalt Characteristics of
Experiences: The Defining Features of Summarized
Events,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 13
(April 2000), pp. 191–201; Ravi Dhar and Klaus
Wertenbroch, “Consumer Choice between Hedonic
and Utilitarian Goods,” Journal of Marketing
Research 37 (February 2000), pp. 60–71; Itamar
Simonson and Amos Tversky, “Choice in Context:
Tradeoff Contrast and Extremeness Aversion,”
Journal of Marketing Research 29 (August 1992),
pp. 281–95; Itamar Simonson, “The Effects of
Purchase Quantity and Timing on Variety-Seeking
Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research 27 (May
1990), pp. 150–62.
75. Leon Schiffman and Leslie Kanuk, Consumer Behavior,
10th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010);
Wayne D. Hoyer and Deborah J. MacInnis, Consumer
Behavior, 5th ed. (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western
College Publishing, 2009).
76. For a detailed review of the practical significance of
consumer decision making, see Itamar Simonson, “Get
Close to Your Customers by Understanding How They
Make Their Choices,” California Management Review
35 (Summer 1993), pp. 78–79.
77. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge:
Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
Happiness (New York: Penguin, 2009); Michael Krauss,
“A Nudge in the Right Direction,” Marketing News,
March 30, 2009, p. 20.
78. See Richard H. Thaler, “Mental Accounting and
Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4 (Summer
1985), pp. 199–214 for a seminal piece; and Richard
Thaler, “Mental Accounting Matters,” Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making 12 (September 1999),
pp. 183–206 for additional perspectives.
79. Gary L. Gastineau and Mark P. Kritzman, Dictionary of
Financial Risk Management, 3rd ed. (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1999).
80. Example adapted from Daniel Kahneman and Amos
Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk,” Econometrica 47 (March 1979),
pp. 263–91.
Endnotes

E15

Chapter 7
1. Adam Lashinsky, “The Enforcer,” Fortune, September
28, 2009, pp. 117–24; Steve Hamm, “Oracle Faces Its
Toughest Deal Yet,” BusinessWeek, May 4, 2009,
p. 24; Steve Hamm and Aaron Ricadela, “Oracle Has
Customers Over a Barrel,” BusinessWeek, September
21, 2009, pp. 52–55.
2. For a comprehensive review of the topic, see James C.
Anderson and James A. Narus, Business Market
Management: Understanding, Creating, and Delivering
Value, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2009).
3. Frederick E. Webster Jr. and Yoram Wind,
Organizational Buying Behavior (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1972), p. 2; For a review of some
academic literature on the topic, see Håkan
Håkansson and Ivan Snehota, “Marketing in Business
Markets,” Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds.,
Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage Publications,
2002), pp. 513–26; Mark Glynn and Arch Woodside,
eds., Business-to-Business Brand Management:
Theory, Research, and Executive Case Study Exercises
in Advances in Business Marketing & Purchasing
series, Volume 15 (Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing, 2009).
4. John Low and Keith Blois, “The Evolution of Generic
Brands in Industrial Markets: The Challenges to
Owners of Brand Equity,” Industrial Marketing
Management 31 (2002), pp. 385–92; Philip Kotler and
Waldemar Pfoertsch, B2B Brand Management (Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2006).
5. Stuart Elliott, “A Film on the Trucking Life Also
Promotes a Big Rig,” New York Times, August 13,
2008; Nikki Hopewell, “Be Brave B-to-B Marketers,”
Marketing News, November 15, 2008, pp. 18–21.
6. “B-to-B Marketing Trends 2010,” Institute for the Study
of Business Markets, http://isbm.smeal.psu.edu.
7. Susan Avery, Purchasing 135 (November 2, 2006),
p. 36; “PPG Honors Six Excellent Suppliers,”
www.ppg.com, June 16, 2009.
8. Michael Collins, “Breaking into the Big Leagues,”
American Demographics, January 1996, p. 24.
9. Patrick J. Robinson, Charles W. Faris, and Yoram
Wind, Industrial Buying and Creative Marketing
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1967).
10. Michele D. Bunn, “Taxonomy of Buying Decision
Approaches,” Journal of Marketing 57 (January 1993),
pp. 38–56; Daniel H. McQuiston, “Novelty, Complexity,
and Importance as Causal Determinants of Industrial
Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Marketing 53 (April 1989),
pp. 66–79; Peter Doyle, Arch G. Woodside, and Paul
Mitchell, “Organizational Buying in New Task and
Rebuy Situations,” Industrial Marketing Management
(February 1979), pp. 7–11.
11. Urban B. Ozanne and Gilbert A. Churchill Jr., “Five
Dimensions of the Industrial Adoption Process,”
Journal of Marketing Research 8 (August 1971),
pp. 322–28.
E16

Endnotes

12. To learn more about how business-to-business firms
can improve their branding, see Philip Kotler and
Waldemar Pfoertsch, B2B Brand Management (Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2006).
13. Steve Hamm, “The Fine Art of Tech Mergers,”
BusinessWeek, July 10, 2006, pp. 70–71.
14. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Building a Better Brand,” Marketing
News, September 15, 2009, pp. 14–17.
15. Britt Dionne, “Behind the Scenes with NetApp,” The
Hub, July/August 2009; “Close-up with Jay Kidd,
CMO, NetApp,” BtoB Magazine, January 20, 2010;
Piet Levy, “It’s Alive! Alive!” Marketing News, April 30,
2009, p. 8.
16. Jeffrey E. Lewin and Naveen Donthu, “The Influence of
Purchase Situation on Buying Center Structure and
Involvement: A Select Meta-Analysis of Organizational
Buying Behavior Research,” Journal of Business
Research 58 (October 2005), pp. 1381–90; R.
Venkatesh and Ajay K. Kohli, “Influence Strategies in
Buying Centers,” Journal of Marketing 59 (October
1995), pp. 71–82; Donald W. Jackson Jr., Janet E.
Keith, and Richard K. Burdick, “Purchasing Agents’
Perceptions of Industrial Buying Center Influence: A
Situational Approach,” Journal of Marketing 48 (Fall
1984), pp. 75–83.
17. Frederic E. Webster and Yoram Wind, Organizational
Buying Behavior (Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1972), p. 6.
18. James C. Anderson and James A. Narus, Business
Market Management: Understanding, Creating, and
Delivering Value, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2009); Frederick E. Webster Jr. and
Yoram Wind, “A General Model for Understanding
Organizational Buying Behavior,” Journal of Marketing
36 (April 1972), pp. 12–19; Frederic E. Webster and
Yoram Wind, Organizational Buying Behavior (Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1972).
19. Allison Enright, “It Takes a Committee to Buy into B-toB,” Marketing News, February 15, 2006, pp. 12–13.
20. Frederick E. Webster Jr. and Kevin Lane Keller, “A
Roadmap for Branding in Industrial Markets,” Journal
of Brand Management 11 (May 2004), pp. 388–402.
21. Scott Ward and Frederick E. Webster Jr.,
“Organizational Buying Behavior,” Tom Robertson and
Hal Kassarjian, eds., Handbook of Consumer Behavior
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991), chapter
12, pp. 419–58.
22. Bob Donath, “Emotions Play Key Role in Biz Brand
Appeal,” Marketing News, June 1, 2006, p. 7.
23. Michael Krauss, “Warriors of the Heart,” Marketing
News, February 1, 2006, p. 7; Brian Hindo, “Emerson
Electric’s Innovation Metrics,” BusinessWeek, June 5,
2008.
24. Bob Lamons, “Branding, B-to-B Style,” Sales and
Marketing Management 157 (September 2005),
pp. 46–50; David A. Kaplan, “No. 1 SAS,” in “The 100
Best Companies to Work For,” Fortune, February 8,
2010, pp. 56–64.

25. Piet Levy, “Reeling in the Hungry Fish,” Marketing
News, May 30, 2009, p. 6; Stephen Baker, Timken
Plots a Rust Belt Resurgence,” BusinessWeek,
October 15, 2009; Matt McClellan, “Rolling Along,”
Smart Business Akron/Canton, October 2008.
26. Richard J. Harrington and Anthony K. Tjan, “Transforming
Strategy One Customer at a Time,” Harvard Business
Review, March 2008, pp. 62–72; Stanley Reed, “The Rise
of a Financial Data Powerhouse,” BusinessWeek, May 15,
2007; Stanley Reed, “Media Giant or Media Muddle?”
BusinessWeek, May 1, 2008.
27. Frederic E. Webster and Yoram Wind, Organizational
Buying Behavior (Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1972), p. 6.
28. James C. Anderson, James A. Narus, and Wouter van
Rossum, “Customer Value Proposition in Business
Markets,” Harvard Business Review, March 2006,
pp. 2–10; James C. Anderson, “From Understanding to
Managing Customer Value in Business Markets,” H.
Håkansson, D. Harrison, and A. Waluszewski, eds.,
Rethinking Marketing: New Marketing Tools (London:
John Wiley & Sons, 2004), pp. 137–59.
29. Susan Caminiti, “Drivers of the Economy,” Fortune, April
17, 2006, p. C1; “Pfizer Turns Around Its Diversity &
Inclusion Initiatives,” Diversity/Careers in Engineering and
Information Technology, December 2009/January 2010;
Barbara Frankel, “Pfizer’s Newest CDO Represents
Transferable Talent,” Diversity Inc., November/
December 2009; “From One Small Business to Another:
Enhancing Community Through Commerce,” Pfizer,
www.pfizersupplierdiversity.com, February 6, 2010.
30. “Case Studies: Rio Tinto,” Quadrem, www.quadrem.com,
February 6, 2010.
31. “Case Study 2003: Mitsui & Co. Cuts the Cost of Trade
Transactions by 50% by Using Trade Card,” Mitsui &
Co., LTD., www.tradecard.com.
32. “Best Practices of the Best-Run Sales Organizations:
Sales Opportunity Blueprinting,” SAP,
http://download.sap.com, February 6, 2010.
33. Patrick J. Robinson, Charles W. Faris, and Yoram
Wind, Industrial Buying and Creative Marketing
(Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1967).
34. Institute Of Scrap Recycling Institute, www.isri.org.
35. Geri Smith, “Hard Times Ease for a Cement King,”
BusinessWeek, November 9, 2009, p. 28.
36. Rajdeep Grewal, James M. Comer, and Raj Mehta, “An
Investigation into the Antecedents of Organizational
Participation in Business-to-Business Electronic
Markets,” Journal of Marketing 65 (July 2001), pp. 17–33.
37. “Open Sesame? Or Could the Doors Slam Shut for
Alibaba.com?” Knowledge@Wharton, July 27, 2005;
Julia Angwin, “Top Online Chemical Exchange Is
Unlikely Success Story,” Wall Street Journal, January
8, 2004; Olga Kharif, “B2B, Take 2,” BusinessWeek,
November 25, 2003; George S. Day, Adam J. Fein,
and Gregg Ruppersberger, “Shakeouts in Digital
Markets: Lessons from B2B Exchanges,” California
Management Review 45 (Winter 2003), pp. 131–51.

38. Ritchie Bros Auctioneers, www.rbauction.com.
39. Brian J. Carroll, Lead Generation for the Complex Sale
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
40. “2009–10 B2B Marketing Benchmark Report,” Marketing
Sherpa, www.sherpastore.com, February 6, 2010.
41. Allison Enright, “It Takes a Committee to Buy into B-toB,” Marketing News, February 15, 2006, pp. 12–13.
42. Robert Hiebeler, Thomas B. Kelly, and Charles
Ketteman, Best Practices: Building Your Business with
Customer-Focused Solutions (New York: Arthur
Andersen/Simon & Schuster, 1998), pp. 122–24.
43. Daniel J. Flint, Robert B. Woodruff, and Sarah Fisher
Gardial, “Exploring the Phenomenon of Customers’
Desired Value Change in a Business-to-Business
Context,” Journal of Marketing 66 (October 2002),
pp. 102–17.
44. Ruth N. Bolton and Matthew B. Myers, “Price-Based
Global Market Segmentation for Services,” Journal of
Marketing 67 (July 2003), pp. 108–28.
45. Wolfgang Ulaga and Andreas Eggert, “Value-Based
Differentiation in Business Relationships: Gaining and
Sustaining Key Supplier Status,” Journal of Marketing
70 (January 2006), pp. 119–36.
46. Christopher Palmeri, “Serving Two (Station) Masters,”
BusinessWeek, July 24, 2006, p. 46.
47. David Kiley, “Small Print Jobs for Peanuts,”
BusinessWeek, July 17, 2006, p. 58.
48. Nirmalya Kumar, Marketing as Strategy: Understanding
the CEO’s Agenda for Driving Growth and Innovation
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004).
49. Ibid.
50. See William Atkinson, “Now That’s Value Added,”
Purchasing, December 11, 2003, p. 26; James A.
Narus and James C. Anderson, “Turn Your Industrial
Distributors into Partners,” Harvard Business Review,
March–April 1986, pp. 66–71; www.lincolnelectric.com/
knowledge/custsolutions/gcr.asp.
51. “Case Study: Automotive Vendor Managed Inventory,
Plexco (Australia),” www.marciajedd.com.
52. For foundational material, see Lloyd M. Rinehart,
James A. Eckert, Robert B. Handfield, Thomas J.
Page Jr., and Thomas Atkin, “An Assessment of
Buyer–Seller Relationships,” Journal of Business
Logistics 25 (2004), pp. 25–62; F. Robert Dwyer, Paul
Schurr, and Sejo Oh, “Developing Buyer–Supplier
Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 51 (April 1987),
pp. 11–28; and Barbara Bund Jackson, Winning &
Keeping Industrial Customers: The Dynamics of
Customer Relations (Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath,
1985).
53. Arnt Buvik and George John, “When Does Vertical
Coordination Improve Industrial Purchasing
Relationships?” Journal of Marketing 64 (October
2000), pp. 52–64.
54. Piet Levy, “Ringing Up a New Approach,” Marketing
News, March 15, 2009, p. 8; “The Inspiration Behind
Tellabs’ ‘New Life’ Campaign,” Business Marketing
Association, www.bmachicago.org, February 6, 2010;
Endnotes

E17

Kate Maddox, “Marketers Look to Social Media for
Interaction,” BtoB Magazine, January 15, 2007;
Chelsea Ely, “Tellabs Aims to “Outsmart, Not Outspend
Large Competitors,” BtoB Magazine, January 9, 2009.
55. Das Narayandas and V. Kasturi Rangan, “Building and
Sustaining Buyer–Seller Relationships in Mature
Industrial Markets,” Journal of Marketing 68 (July
2004), pp. 63–77.
56. Robert W. Palmatier, Rajiv P. Dant, Dhruv Grewal, and
Kenneth R. Evans, “Factors Influencing the
Effectiveness of Relationship Marketing: A MetaAnalysis,” Journal of Marketing 70 (October 2006),
pp. 136–53; Jean L. Johnson, Ravipreet S. Sohli, and
Rajdeep Grewal, “The Role of Relational Knowledge
Stores in Interfirm Partnering,” Journal of Marketing 68
(July 2004), pp. 21–36; Fred Selnes and James Sallis,
“Promoting Relationship Learning,” Journal of
Marketing 67 (July 2003), pp. 80–95; Patricia M. Doney
and Joseph P. Cannon, “An Examination of the Nature
of Trust in Buyer–Seller Relationships,” Journal of
Marketing 61 (April 1997), pp. 35–51; Shankar
Ganesan, “Determinants of Long-Term Orientation in
Buyer–Seller Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 58
(April 1994), pp. 1–19.
57. William W. Keep, Stanley C. Hollander, and Roger
Dickinson, “Forces Impinging on Long-Term
Business-to-Business Relationships in the United
States: An Historical Perspective,” Journal of
Marketing 62 (April 1998), pp. 31–45.
58. Joseph P. Cannon and William D. Perreault Jr.,
“Buyer–Seller Relationships in Business Markets,”
Journal of Marketing Research 36 (November 1999),
pp. 439–60.
59. Jan B. Heide and Kenneth H. Wahne, “Friends,
Businesspeople, and Relationship Roles: A Conceptual
Framework and Research Agenda,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (July 2006), pp. 90–103.
60. Joseph P. Cannon and William D. Perreault Jr.,
“Buyer–Seller Relationships in Business Markets,”
Journal of Marketing Research 36 (November 1999),
pp. 439–60.
61. Thomas G. Noordewier, George John, and John R.
Nevin, “Performance Outcomes of Purchasing
Arrangements in Industrial Buyer–Vendor
Arrangements,” Journal of Marketing 54 (October
1990), pp. 80–93; Arnt Buvik and George John, “When
Does Vertical Coordination Improve Industrial
Purchasing Relationships?” Journal of Marketing 64
(October 2000), pp. 52–64.
62. Akesel I. Rokkan, Jan B. Heide, and Kenneth H.
Wathne, “Specific Investment in Marketing
Relationships: Expropriation and Bonding Effects,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (May 2003),
pp. 210–24.
63. Kenneth H. Wathne and Jan B. Heide, “Relationship
Governance in a Supply Chain Network,” Journal of
Marketing 68 (January 2004), pp. 73–89; Douglas
Bowman and Das Narayandas, “Linking Customer
Management Effort to Customer Profitability in
E18

Endnotes

Business Markets,” Journal of Marketing Research 61
(November 2004), pp. 433–47; Mrinal Ghosh and
George John, “Governance Value Analysis and
Marketing Strategy,” Journal of Marketing 63 (Special
Issue, 1999), pp. 131–45.
64. Sandy Jap, “Pie Expansion Effects: Collaboration
Processes in Buyer–Seller Relationships,” Journal of
Marketing Research 36 (November 1999), pp. 461–75.
65. Buvik and John, “When Does Vertical Coordination
Improve Industrial Purchasing Relationships?” pp.
52–64.
66. Kenneth H. Wathne and Jan B. Heide, “Opportunism
in Interfirm Relationships: Forms, Outcomes, and
Solutions,” Journal of Marketing 64 (October 2000),
pp. 36–51.
67. Mary Walton, “When Your Partner Fails You,” Fortune,
May 26, 1997, pp. 151–54.
68. Mark B. Houston and Shane A. Johnson,
“Buyer–Supplier Contracts versus Joint Ventures:
Determinants and Consequences of Transaction
Structure,” Journal of Marketing Research 37 (February
2000), pp. 1–15.
69. Aksel I. Rokkan, Jan B. Heide, and Kenneth H.
Wathne, “Specific Investment in Marketing
Relationships: Expropriation and Bonding Effects,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (May 2003),
pp. 210–24.
70. Elisabeth Sullivan, “A Worthwhile Investment,”
Marketing News, December 30, 2009, p. 10.
71. Shar VanBoskirk, “B2B Email Marketing Best
Practices: Hewlett Packard,” Forrester,
www.forrester.com, February 21, 2006.
72. Josh Bernoff, “Why B-to-B Ought to Love Social
Media,” Marketing News, April 15, 2009, p. 20;
Elisabeth Sullivan, “A Long Slog,” Marketing News,
February 28, 2009, pp. 15–18.
73. Elisabeth Sullivan, “One to One,” Marketing News, May
15, 2009, pp. 10–12.
74. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Cognos Inc.,” Marketing News,
April 1, 2008, p. 10.
75. Paul King, “Purchasing: Keener Competition Requires
Thinking Outside the Box,” Nation’s Restaurant News,
August 18, 2003, p. 87.
76. Bill Gormley, “The U.S. Government Can Be Your
Lifelong Customer,” Washington Business Journal,
January 23, 2009; Chris Warren, “How to Sell to Uncle
Sam,” BNET Crash Course, www.bnet.com, February 6,
2010.
77. Matthew Swibel and Janet Novack, “The Scariest
Customer,” Forbes, November 10, 2003, pp. 96–97.
78. Laura M. Litvan, “Selling to Uncle Sam: New, Easier
Rules,” Nation’s Business (March 1995), pp. 46–48.
79. Ellen Messmer, “Feds Do E-Commerce the Hard Way,”
Network World, April 13, 1998, pp. 31–32.
80. Bill Gormley, “The U.S. Government Can Be Your
Lifelong Customer,” Washington Business Journal,
January 23, 2009.

Chapter 8
1. Jonathan Schneider, “Club Med—Sex, Sand, and
Surf,” Club Med, www.clubmed.us, January 26, 2010;
Brand Channel, www.brandchannel.com, July 2, 2001;
Christina White, “It’s Raining Hard on Club Med,”
BusinessWeek, February 4, 2002; Susan Spano, “Club
Med, Swinging into the Future,” Morning Call, January
15, 2006; Cherisse Beh, “Club Med Unveils Global
Branding Push,” Marketing Interactive.com,
www.marketing-interactive.com, March 31, 2008.
2. Dale Buss, “Brands in the ‘Hood,” Point, December
2005, pp. 19–24.
3. Nanette Byrnes, “What’s Beyond for Bed Bath &
Beyond?” BusinessWeek, January 19, 2004, pp. 45–50;
Andrea Lillo, “Bed Bath Sees More Room for Growth,”
Home Textiles Today, July 7, 2003, p. 2.
4. By visiting the company’s sponsored site,
MyBestSegments.com, you can enter in a zip code
and discover the top five clusters for that area. Note
that another leading supplier of geodemographic data
is ClusterPlus (Strategic Mapping).
5. Becky Ebenkamp, “Urban America Redefined,”
Brandweek, October 6, 2003, pp. 12–13.
6. Mike Freeman, “Clusters of Customers,” San Diego
Union-Tribune, December 19, 2004.
7. Michael J. Weiss, “To Be About to Be,” American
Demographics, September 2003, pp. 29–36.
8. “YouthPulse: The Definitive Study of Today’s Youth
Generation,” Harris Interactive, 2009,
www.harrisinteractive.com.
9. Gina Chon, “Car Makers Talk 'Bout G-G-Generations,”
Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2006.
10. For some practical implications, see Marti Barletta,
Marketing to Women: How to Increase Share of the
World’s Largest Market, 2nd ed. (New York: Kaplan
Business, 2006); Bridget Brennan, Why She Buys: The
New Strategy for Reaching the World’s Most Powerful
Consumers (New York: Crown Business, 2009).
11. For more consumer behavior perspectives on gender,
see Jane Cunningham and Philippa Roberts, “What
Woman Want,” Brand Strategy, December
2006–January 2007, pp. 40–41; Robert J. Fisher and
Laurette Dube, “Gender Differences in Responses to
Emotional Advertising: A Social Desirability
Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research 31
(March 2005), pp. 850–58; Joan Meyers-Levy and
Durairaj Maheswaran, “Exploring Males’ and Females’
Processing Strategies: When and Why Do Differences
Occur in Consumers’ Processing of Ad Claims,”
Journal of Consumer Research 18 (June 1991),
pp. 63–70; Joan Meyers-Levy and Brian Sternthal,
“Gender Differences in the Use of Message Cues and
Judgments,” Journal of Marketing Research 28
(February 1991), pp. 84–96.
12. Dawn Klingensmith, “Marketing Gurus Try to Read
Women’s Minds,” Chicago Tribune, April 19, 2006;
Elisabeth Sullivan, “The Mother Lode,” Marketing
News, July 15, 2008, p. 28; Claire Cain Miller,

“Advertising Woman to Woman, Online,” New York
Times, August 13, 2008; Eric Newman, “The Mook
Industrial Complex,” Brandweek, January 14, 2008,
pp. 21–24.
13. Marti Barletta, “Who’s Really Buying That Car? Ask
Her,” Brandweek, September 4, 2006, p. 20; Robert
Craven, Kiki Maurey, and John Davis, “What Women
Really Want,” Critical Eye 15 (July 2006), pp. 50–53;
Michael J. Silverstein and Kate Sayre, “The Female
Economy,” Harvard Business Review, September
2009, pp. 46–53.
14. Aixa Pascual, “Lowe’s Is Sprucing Up Its House,”
BusinessWeek, June 3, 2002, pp. 56–57; Pamela
Sebastian Ridge, “Tool Sellers Tap Their Feminine
Side,” Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2002.
15. Michael J. Silverstein and Neil Fiske, Trading Up: The
New American Luxury (New York: Portfolio, 2003);
Dylan Machan, “Sharing Victoria’s Secret,” Forbes,
June 5, 1995, p. 132; www.limitedbrands.com.
16. Ian Zack, “Out of the Tube,” Forbes, November 26,
2001, p. 200.
17. Gregory L. White and Shirley Leung, “Middle Market
Shrinks as Americans Migrate toward the Higher End,”
Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2002.
18. Burt Helm, “PNC Lures Gen Y with Its ‘Virtual
Wallet’ Account,” BusinessWeek, November 26,
2008; Virtual Wallet by PNC Leading the Way,
www.pncvirtualwallet.com, January 26, 2010.
19. Charles D. Schewe and Geoffrey Meredith,
“Segmenting Global Markets by Generational Cohort:
Determining Motivations by Age,” Journal of
Consumer Behavior 4 (October 2004), pp. 51–63;
Geoffrey E. Meredith and Charles D. Schewe,
Managing by Defining Moments: America’s 7
Generational Cohorts, Their Workplace Values, and
Why Managers Should Care (New York: Hungry
Minds, 2002); Geoffrey E. Meredith, Charles D.
Schewe, and Janice Karlovich, Defining Markets
Defining Moments (New York: Hungry Minds, 2001).
20. Piet Levy, “The Quest for Cool,” Marketing News,
February 28, 2009, p. 6; Michelle Conlin, “Youth
Quake,” BusinessWeek, January 21, 2008, pp. 32–36.
21. Karen E. Klein, “The ABCs of Selling to Generation X,”
BusinessWeek, April 15, 2004; M. J. Stephey, “Gen-X:
the Ignored Generation?” Time, April 16, 2008; Tamara
Erickson, “Don’t Treat Them Like Baby Boomers,”
BusinessWeek, August 25, 2008, p. 64.
22. Louise Lee, “Love Those Boomers,” BusinessWeek,
October 24, 2005, p. 94; Bob Moos, “Last of Boomers
Turn 40,” Dallas Morning News, January 1, 2005; Linda
Tischler, “Where the Bucks Are,” Fast Company, March
2004, pp. 71–77; Alycia de Mesa, “Don’t Ignore the
Boomer Consumer,” brandchannel,
www.brandchannel.com, June 25, 2007; Judann
Pollack, “Boomers Don’t Want Your Pity, but They Do
Demand Your Respect,” Advertising Age, October 8,
2007, p. 24.
23. Mark Dolliver, “Marketing to Today’s 65-plus
Consumers,” Adweek, July 27, 2009.
Endnotes

E19

24. Stuart Elliott, “The Older Audience Is Looking Better
Than Ever,” New York Times, April 19, 2009.
25. Marissa Miley, “Don’t Bypass African-Americans,”
Advertising Age, February 2, 2009.
26. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Choose Your Words Wisely,”
Marketing News, February 15, 2008, p. 22; Emily
Bryson York, “Brands Prepare for a More Diverse
‘General Market,’” Advertising Age, November 30,
2009, p. 6.
27. Emily Bryson York, “Brands Prepare for a More Diverse
‘General Market,’” Advertising Age, November 30,
2009, p. 6.
28. Daniel B. Honigman, “10 Minutes with . . . Caralene
Robinson,” Marketing News, February 15, 2008,
pp. 24–28; Sonya A. Grier, Anne Brumbaugh, and
Corliss G. Thornton, “Crossover Dreams: Consumer
Responses to Ethnic-Oriented Products,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (April 2006), pp. 35–51.
29. “Hispanics Will Top All U.S. Minority Groups for
Purchasing Power by 2007,” Selig Center of Economic
Growth, Terry College of Business, University of
Georgia,/www.selig.uga.edu, September 1, 2006;
Jeffrey M. Humphreys, “The Multicultural Economy
2008,” Selig Center of Economic Growth, Terry College
of Business, University of Georgia, 2008.
30. Andrew Pierce, “Multiculti Markets Demand
Multilayered Markets,” Marketing News, May 1, 2008,
p. 21.
31. Barbara De Lollis, “At Goya, It’s All in La Familia,” USA
Today, March 24, 2008, pp. 1B–2B.
32. Ronald Grover, “The Payoff from Targeting Hispanics,”
BusinessWeek, April 20, 2009, p. 76; Della de Lafuente,
“The New Weave,” Adweek Media, March 3, 2008,
pp. 26–28.
33. Piet Levy, “La Musica to Their Ears,” Marketing News,
May 15, 2009, pp. 14–16; Ronald Grover, “The Payoff
from Targeting Hispanics,” BusinessWeek, April 20,
2009, p. 76.
34. Elaine Wong, “Why Bounty Is a Hit with U.S.
Hispanics,” Brandweek, August 17, 2009, p. 6.
35. Samar Farah, “Latino Marketing Goes Mainstream,”
Boston Globe, July 9, 2006; Dianne Solis, “Latino
Buying Power Still Surging,” Dallas Morning News,
September 1, 2006; Joseph Tarnowski, “Assimilate or
Perish,” Progressive Grocer, February 1, 2006.
36. Kevin Lane Keller, “got milk?: Branding a Commodity,”
Best Practice Cases in Branding, 3rd ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008); got milk?
www.gotmilk.com; Jeff Manning, got milk?: The book
(Roseville, CA: Prima Lifestyles 1999).
37. Elisabeth A. Sullivan, “Speak Our Language,”
Marketing News, March 15, 2008, pp. 20–22.
38. Rita Chang, “Mobile Marketers Target Receptive
Hispanic Audience,” Advertising Age, January 26,
2009, p. 18.
39. Adele Lassere, “The Marketing Corner: Marketing to
African-American Consumers,” Epoch Times,
November 27, 2009.
E20

Endnotes

40. Lisa Sanders, “How to Target Blacks? First You Gotta
Spend,” Advertising Age, July 3, 2006, p. 19; Pepper
Miller and Herb Kemp, What’s Black about It? Insights
to Increase Your Share of a Changing African-American
Market (Ithaca, NY: Paramount Market Publishing,
2005).
41. Marissa Fabris, “Special Report on Multicultural
Marketing: Market Power,” Target Marketing,
www.targetmarketingmag.com, May 2008.
42. Sonya A. Grier and Shiriki K. Kumanyika, “The Context
for Choice: Health Implications of Targeted Food and
Beverage Marketing to African-Americans,” American
Journal of Public Health 98 (September 2008), pp.
1616–29.
43. “The ‘Invisible’ Market,” Brandweek, January 30,
2006.
44. Andrew Pierce, “Multiculti Markets Demand Multilayered
Markets,” Marketing News, May 1, 2008, p. 21.
45. “The ‘Invisible’ Market,” Brandweek, January 30,
2006; Bill Imada, “Four Myths about the AsianAmerican Market,” Advertising Age, October 31,
2007; “Kraft Targets Asian American Moms,”
Brandweek, September 1, 2005.
46. “Marketing to Asian-Americans,” Special Supplement
to Brandweek, May 26, 2008.
47. Kate Rockwood, “Partnering with Pride,” Fast
Company, November 2009, pp. 21–28.
48. Prime Access, Inc, www.primeaccess.net.
49. Strategic Business Insights, www.strategicbusiness
insights.com.
50. Andrew Kaplan, “A Fruitful Mix,” Beverage World, May
2006, pp. 28–36.
51. This classification was adapted from George H. Brown,
“Brand Loyalty: Fact or Fiction?” Advertising Age, June
1952–January 1953, a series. See also, Peter E. Rossi,
Robert E. McCulloch, and Greg M. Allenby, “The Value
of Purchase History Data in Target Marketing,”
Marketing Science 15 (Fall 1996), pp. 321–40.
52. James C. Anderson and James A. Narus, “Capturing
the Value of Supplementary Services,” Harvard
Business Review, January–February 1995, pp. 75–83.
53. For a review of many of the methodological issues in
developing segmentation schemes, see William R.
Dillon and Soumen Mukherjee, “A Guide to the Design
and Execution of Segmentation Studies,” Rajiv Grover
and Marco Vriens, eds., Handbook of Marketing
Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2006); and
Michael Wedel and Wagner A. Kamakura, Market
Segmentation: Conceptual and Methodological
Foundations (Boston: Kluwer, 1997).
54. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York:
Free Press, 1980), pp. 22–23.
55. Estee Lauder, www.esteelauder.com.
56. Barry Silverstein, “Hallmark—Calling Card,”
www.brandchannel.com, June 15, 2009; Hallmark,
www.hallmark.com; Brad van Auken, “Leveraging the
Brand: Hallmark Case Study,” www.brandstrategyinsider.
com, January 11, 2008.

57. Jerry Harkavy, “Colgate Buying Control of Tom’s of
Maine for $100 Million,” Associated Press,
Boston.com, March 21, 2006.
58. Robert Blattberg and John Deighton, “Interactive
Marketing: Exploiting the Age of Addressibility,” Sloan
Management Review 33 (Fall 1991), pp. 5–14.
59. Don Peppers and Martha Rogers, One-to-One B2B:
Customer Development Strategies for the Business-ToBusiness World (New York: Doubleday, 2001); Jerry Wind
and Arvind Rangaswamy, “Customerization: The Next
Revolution in Mass Customization,” Journal of Interactive
Marketing 15 (Winter 2001), pp. 13–32.
60. James C. Anderson and James A. Narus, “Capturing
the Value of Supplementary Services,” Harvard
Business Review, January–February 1995, pp. 75–83.
61. Itamar Simonson, “Determinants of Customers’
Responses to Customized Offers: Conceptual
Framework and Research Propositions,” Journal of
Marketing 69 (January 2005), pp. 32–45.
62. Joann Muller, “Kmart con Salsa: Will It Be Enough?”
BusinessWeek, September 9, 2002.
63. Bart Macchiette and Roy Abhijit, “Sensitive Groups
and Social Issues,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 11
(Fall 1994), pp. 55–64.
64. Roger O. Crockett, “They’re Lining Up for Flicks in the
‘Hood,’” BusinessWeek, June 8, 1998, pp. 75–76.
65. Caroline E. Mayer, “Nurturing Brand Loyalty; with
Preschool Supplies, Firms Woo Future Customers—
and Current Parents,” Washington Post, October 12,
2003.

Chapter 9
1. Alli McConnon, “Lululemon’s Next Workout,”
BusinessWeek, June 9, 2008, pp. 43–44; Danielle
Sacks, “Lululemon’s Cult of Selling,” Fast Company,
March 2009; Bryant Urstadt, “Lust for Lulu,” New York
Magazine, July 26, 2009.
2. For foundational work on branding, see Jean-Noel
Kapferer, The New Strategic Brand Management,
4th ed. (New York: Kogan Page, 2008); David A.
Aaker and Erich Joachimsthaler, Brand Leadership
(New York: Free Press, 2000); David A. Aaker, Building
Strong Brands (New York: Free Press, 1996); David A.
Aaker, Managing Brand Equity (New York: Free Press,
1991).
3. Interbrand Group, World’s Greatest Brands: An
International Review (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1992). See also Karl Moore and Susan Reid, “The
Birth of Brand,” Business History 50 (2008),
pp. 419–32.
4. Rajneesh Suri and Kent B. Monroe, “The Effects of
Time Pressure on Consumers’ Judgments of Prices
and Products,” Journal of Consumer Research 30
(June 2003), pp. 92–104.
5. Rita Clifton and John Simmons, eds., The Economist
on Branding (New York: Bloomberg Press, 2004); Rik
Riezebos, Brand Management: A Theoretical and
Practical Approach (Essex, England: Pearson

Education, 2003); and Paul Temporal, Advanced Brand
Management: From Vision to Valuation (Singapore:
John Wiley & Sons, 2002).
6. Constance E. Bagley, Managers and the Legal
Environment: Strategies for the 21st Century, 3rd ed.
(Cincinnati, OH: South-Western College/West
Publishing, 2005); For a marketing academic point of
view of some important legal issues, see Judith
Zaichkowsky, The Psychology behind Trademark
Infringement and Counterfeiting (Mahwah, NJ: LEA
Publishing, 2006) and Maureen Morrin and Jacob
Jacoby, “Trademark Dilution: Empirical Measures for
an Elusive Concept,” Journal of Public Policy &
Marketing 19 (May 2000), pp. 265–76; Maureen Morrin,
Jonathan Lee, and Greg M. Allenby, “Determinants of
Trademark Dilution,” Journal of Consumer Research 33
(September 2006), pp. 248–57.
7. Tulin Erdem, “Brand Equity as a Signaling
Phenomenon,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 7
(1998), pp. 131–57; Joffre Swait and Tulin Erdem,
“Brand Effects on Choice and Choice Set Formation
Under Uncertainty,” Marketing Science 26
(September–October 2007), pp. 679–97; Tulin Erdem,
Joffre Swait, and Ana Valenzuela, “Brands as Signals:
A Cross-Country Validation Study,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (January 2006), pp. 34–49.
8. Scott Davis, Brand Asset Management: Driving
Profitable Growth through Your Brands (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2000); Mary W. Sullivan, “How Brand
Names Affect the Demand for Twin Automobiles,”
Journal of Marketing Research 35 (May 1998),
pp. 154–65; D. C. Bello and M. B. Holbrook, “Does an
Absence of Brand Equity Generalize across Product
Classes?” Journal of Business Research 34 (October
1996), pp. 125–31; Adrian J. Slywotzky and Benson P.
Shapiro, “Leveraging to Beat the Odds: The New
Marketing Mindset,” Harvard Business Review,
September–October 1993, pp. 97–107.
9. The power of branding is not without its critics,
however, some of whom reject the commercialism
associated with branding activities. See Naomi Klein,
No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies (New York:
Picador, 2000).
10. “Study: Food in McDonald’s Wrapper Tastes Better to
Kids,” Associated Press, August 6, 2007.
11. Natalie Mizik and Robert Jacobson, “Talk about Brand
Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, October 2005,
p. 1; Baruch Lev, Intangibles: Management,
Measurement, and Reporting (Washington, DC:
Brookings Institute, 2001).
12. For an academic discussion of how consumers
become so strongly attached to people as brands, see
Matthew Thomson, “Human Brands: Investigating
Antecedents to Consumers’ Stronger Attachments to
Celebrities,” Journal of Marketing 70 (July 2006),
pp. 104–19; For some practical branding tips from the
world of rock and roll, see Roger Blackwell and Tina
Stephan, Brands That Rock (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2004); and from the world of sports, see Irving
Endnotes

E21

Rein, Philip Kotler, and Ben Shields, The Elusive Fan:
Reinventing Sports in a Crowded Marketplace (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
13. Mark Borden, “Shaun White Lifts Off,” Fast Company,
February 2009, pp. 56–65; Mike Duff, “Target Cuts
Across Fashion with Shaun White,” bnet.com,
February 20, 2009.
14. Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 3rd
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008);
David A. Aaker and Erich Joachimsthaler, Brand
Leadership (New York: Free Press 2000); David A.
Aaker, Building Strong Brands (New York: Free Press,
1996); David A. Aaker, Managing Brand Equity (New
York: Free Press, 1991).
15. Other approaches are based on economic principles of
signaling, for example, Tulin Erdem, “Brand Equity as a
Signaling Phenomenon,” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 7 (1998), pp. 131–57; or more of a
sociological, anthropological, or biological perspective
(e.g., Grant McCracken, Culture and Consumption II:
Markets, Meaning, and Brand Management
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005); Susan
Fournier, “Consumers and Their Brands: Developing
Relationship Theory in Consumer Research,” Journal
of Consumer Research 24 (September 1998),
pp. 343–73; Craig J. Thompson, Aric Rindfleisch, and
Zeynep Arsel, “Emotional Branding and the Strategic
Value of the Doppelganger Brand Image,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (January 2006), pp. 50–64.
16. Jennifer L. Aaker, “Dimensions of Brand Personality,”
Journal of Marketing Research 34 (August 1997),
pp. 347–56; Jean-Noel Kapferer, Strategic Brand
Management: New Approaches to Creating and
Evaluating Brand Equity (London: Kogan Page, 1992),
p. 38; Scott Davis, Brand Asset Management: Driving
Profitable Growth through Your Brands (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2000). For an overview of academic
research on branding, see Kevin Lane Keller, “Branding
and Brand Equity,” Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley,
eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage
Publications, 2002), pp. 151–78; Kevin Lane Keller and
Don Lehmann, “Brands and Branding: Research
Findings and Future Priorities,” Marketing Science 25
(November–December 2006), pp. 740–59.
17. Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 3rd
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008).
18. Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Success through
Differentiation—of Anything,” Harvard Business
Review, January–February 1980, pp. 83–91.
19. Kusum Ailawadi, Donald R. Lehmann, and Scott
Neslin, “Revenue Premium as an Outcome Measure of
Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing 67 (October 2003),
pp. 1–17.
20. Jon Miller and David Muir, The Business of Brands
(West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, 2004).
21. Michael Bush, “Virgin America,” Advertising Age,
November 16, 2009, p. 12.
22. Kevin Lane Keller, “Building Customer-Based Brand
Equity: A Blueprint for Creating Strong Brands,”
E22

Endnotes

Marketing Management 10 (July–August 2001),
pp. 15–19.
23. For some academic insights, see Matthew Thomson,
Deborah J. MacInnis, and C. W. Park, “The Ties That
Bind: Measuring the Strength of Consumers’ Emotional
Attachments to Brands,” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 15 (2005), pp. 77–91; Alexander
Fedorikhin, C. Whan Park, and Matthew Thomson,
“Beyond Fit and Attitude: The Effect of Emotional
Attachment on Consumer Responses to Brand
Extensions,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 18
(2008), pp. 281–91; Jennifer Edson Escalas, “Narrative
Processing: Building Consumer Connections to
Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 14 (1996),
pp. 168–79. For some managerial guidelines, see
Kevin Roberts, Lovemarks: The Future beyond Brands
(New York: Powerhouse Books, 2004); and Douglas
Atkins, The Culting of Brands (New York: Penguin
Books, 2004).
24. Paul Rittenberg and Maura Clancey, “Testing the Value
of Media Engagement for Advertising Effectiveness,”
www.knowledgenetworks.com, Spring–Summer 2006,
pp. 35–42.
25. M. Berk Ataman, Carl F. Mela, and Harald J. van
Heerde, “Building Brands,” Marketing Science 27
(November–December 2008), pp. 1036–54.
26. Walter Mossberg, “Is Bing the Thing?” Wall Street
Journal, June 2, 2009, p. R4; Burt Heim, “The Dubbing
of ‘Bing,’” BusinessWeek, June 15, 2009, p. 23; Todd
Wasserman, “Why Microsoft Chose the Name ‘Bing,’”
Brandweek, June 1, 2009, p. 33.
27. Rachel Dodes, “From Tracksuits to Fast Track,” Wall
Street Journal, September 13, 2006.
28. “42 Below,” www.betterbydesign.org.nz, September
14, 2007.
29. Amanda Baltazar, “Silly Brand Names Get Serious
Attention,” Brandweek, December 3, 2007, p. 4.
30. Alina Wheeler, Designing Brand Identity (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2003).
31. Pat Fallon and Fred Senn, Juicing the Orange: How to
Turn Creativity into a Powerful Business Advantage
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press,
2006); Eric A. Yorkston and Geeta Menon, “A Sound
Idea: Phonetic Effects of Brand Names on Consumer
Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research 31 (June),
pp. 43–51; Tina M. Lowery and L. J. Shrum, “Phonetic
Symbolism and Brand Name Preference,” Journal of
Consumer Research 34 (October 2007), pp. 406–14.
32. For some interesting theoretical perspectives, see
Claudiu V. Dimofte and Richard F. Yalch, “Consumer
Response to Polysemous Brand Slogans,” Journal of
Consumer Research 33 (March 2007), pp. 515–22.
33. John R. Doyle and Paul A. Bottomly, “Dressed for the
Occasion: Font-Product Congruity in the Perception of
Logotype,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 16 (2006),
pp. 112–23; Kevin Lane Keller, Susan Heckler, and
Michael J. Houston, “The Effects of Brand Name
Suggestiveness on Advertising Recall,” Journal of
Marketing 62 (January 1998), pp. 48–57; For an

in-depth examination of how brand names get
developed, see Alex Frankel, Wordcraft: The Art of
Turning Little Words into Big Business (New York:
Crown Publishers, 2004).
34. Don Schultz and Heidi Schultz, IMC: The Next
Generation (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003); Don E.
Schultz, Stanley I. Tannenbaum, and Robert F.
Lauterborn, Integrated Marketing Communications
(Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books, 1993).
35. Mohanbir Sawhney, “Don’t Harmonize, Synchronize,”
Harvard Business Review, July–August 2001, pp. 101–8.
36. David C. Court, John E. Forsyth, Greg C. Kelly, and
Mark A. Loch, “The New Rules of Branding: Building
Strong Brands Faster,” McKinsey White Paper Fall
1999; Scott Bedbury, A New Brand World (New York:
Viking Press, 2002).
37. Sonia Reyes, “Cheerios: The Ride,” Brandweek,
September 23, 2002, pp. 14–16.
38. Dawn Iacobucci and Bobby Calder, eds., Kellogg on
Integrated Marketing (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2003).
39. Drew Madsen, “Olive Garden: Creating Value through
an Integrated Brand Experience,” presentation at
Marketing Science Institute Conference, Brand
Orchestration, Orlando, Florida, December 4, 2003.
40. Michael Dunn and Scott Davis, “Building Brands from
the Inside,” Marketing Management (May–June 2003),
pp. 32–37; Scott Davis and Michael Dunn, Building the
Brand-Driven Business (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2002).
41. Stan Maklan and Simon Knox, Competing on Value
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times, Prentice Hall,
2000).
42. Coeli Carr, “Seeking to Attract Top Prospects,
Employers Brush Up on Brands,” New York Times,
September 10, 2006.
43. The principles and examples from this passage are
based on Colin Mitchell, “Selling the Brand Inside,”
Harvard Business Review, January 2002, pp. 99–105.
For an in-depth discussion of how two organizations,
QuikTrip and Wawa, have developed stellar internal
branding programs, see Neeli Bendapudi and Venkat
Bendapudi, “Creating the Living Brand,” Harvard
Business Review, May 2005, pp. 124–32.
44. James H. McAlexander, John W. Schouten and Harold
F. Koenig, “Building Brand Community,” Journal of
Marketing 66 (January 2002), pp. 38–54. For some
notable examinations of brand communities, see René
Algesheimer, Uptal M. Dholakia, and Andreas
Herrmann, “The Social Influence of Brand Community:
Evidence from European Car Clubs,” Journal of
Marketing 69 (July 2005), pp. 19–34; Albert M. Muniz
Jr. and Hope Jensen Schau, “Religiosity in the
Abandoned Apple Newton Brand Community,” Journal
of Consumer Research 31 (2005), pp. 412–32; Robert
Kozinets, “Utopian Enterprise: Articulating the
Meanings of Star Trek’s Culture of Consumption,”
Journal of Consumer Research 28 (June 2001),
pp. 67–87; John W. Schouten and James H.

McAlexander, “Subcultures of Consumption: An
Ethnography of New Bikers,” Journal of Consumer
Research 22 (June 1995), pp. 43–61.
45. Albert M. Muniz Jr. and Thomas C. O’Guinn, “Brand
Community,” Journal of Consumer Research 27 (March
2001), pp. 412–32.
46. Susan Fournier and Lara Lee, “The Seven Deadly Sins
of Brand Community ‘Management,’” Marketing
Science Institute Special Report 08-208, 2008.
47. Harley-Davidson USA, www.hog.com; Joseph Weber,
“Harley Just Keeps on Cruisin’,” BusinessWeek,
November 6, 2006, pp. 71–72.
48. Scott A. Thompson and Rajiv K. Sinha, “Brand
Communities and New Product Adoption: The
Influence and Limits of Oppositional Loyalty,” Journal
of Marketing 72 (November 2008), pp. 65–80.
49. Deborah Roeddder John, Barbara Loken, Kyeong-Heui
Kim, and Alokparna Basu Monga, “Brand Concept
Maps: A Methodology for Identifying Brand
Association Networks,” Journal of Marketing Research
43 (November 2006), pp. 549–63.
50. In terms of related empirical insights, see Manoj K.
Agrawal and Vithala Rao “An Empirical Comparison of
Consumer-Based Measures of Brand Equity,”
Marketing Letters 7 (July 1996), pp. 237–47; and
Walfried Lassar, Banwari Mittal, and Arun Sharma,
“Measuring Customer-Based Brand Equity,” Journal of
Consumer Marketing 12 (1995), pp. 11–19.
51. “The Best Global Brands,” BusinessWeek, June 19,
2009; The article ranks and critiques the 100 best
global brands using the valuation method developed
by Interbrand. For more discussion on some brand
winners and losers, see Matt Haig, Brand Royalty: How
the Top 100 Brands Thrive and Survive (London: Kogan
Page, 2004); Matt Haig, Brand Failures: The Truth
about the 100 Biggest Branding Mistakes of All Time
(London: Kogan Page, 2003); For an academic
discussion of valuing brand equity, see V. Srinivasan,
Chan Su Park, and Dae Ryun Chang, “An Approach to
the Measurement, Analysis, and Prediction of Brand
Equity and Its Sources,” Management Science 51
(September 2005), pp. 1433–48.
52. Mark Sherrington, Added Value: The Alchemy of
Brand-Led Growth (Hampshire, UK: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003).
53. For some discussion of what factors determine longterm branding success, see Allen P. Adamson, Brand
Simple (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006).
54. Nikhil Bahdur and John Jullens, “New Life for Tired
Brands,” Strategy+Business 50 (Spring 2008).
55. David Lieberman, “Discovery Chief Takes a Network
on a Wild Ride,” USA Today, September 2, 2009,
pp. 1B–2B; Discovery Communications, www.
corporate.discovery.com; Kenneth Hein, “Consumers
Clinging to Old Favorite Brands,” Brandweek,
January 20, 2009; Linda Moss and Linda Haugsted,
“Discovery Times New Branding Campaign to
‘Deadliest Catch’ Debut,” Multichannel News,
March 31, 2008.
Endnotes

E23

56. Natalie Mizik and Robert Jacobson, “Trading Off
between Value Creation and Value Appropriation: The
Financial Implications of Shifts in Strategic Emphasis,”
Journal of Marketing 67 (January 2003), pp. 63–76.
57. Larry Light and Joan Kiddon, Six Rules for Brand
Revitalization: Learn How Companies Like McDonald’s
Can Re-Energize Their Brands (Wharton School
Publishing, 2009).
58. Jeff Cioletti, “The Passion of Pabst,” Beverage World,
January 2007, pp. 24–28; Jeremy Mullman, “Conspicuous
(Downscale) Consumption: Pabst Sees 25% Sales
Growth,” Advertising Age, September 16, 2009.
59. Evan West, “Smells Like a Billion Bucks,” Fast
Company, May 2009, pp. 44–46; Patricia Winters
Lauro, “Old Spice Begins a Revival as a Body-Care
Line for College-Age Men, with Towelettes,” New York
Times, April 29, 2002.
60. Rebecca J. Slotegraaf and Koen Pauwels, “The Impact
of Brand Equity and Innovation on the Long-Term
Effectiveness of Promotions,” Journal of Marketing
Research 45 (June 2008), pp. 293–306.
61. Keith Naughton, “Fixing Cadillac,” Newsweek, May 28,
2001, pp. 36–37.
62. Elizabeth Woyke, “Paul Stuart Tries to Unstuff the
Shirts,” BusinessWeek, October 8, 2007, p. 86.
63. Peter Farquhar, “Managing Brand Equity,” Marketing
Research 1 (September 1989), pp. 24–33.
64. Steven M. Shugan, “Branded Variants,” 1989 AMA
Educators’ Proceedings (Chicago: American Marketing
Association, 1989), pp. 33–38; M. Bergen, S. Dutta,
and S. M. Shugan, “Branded Variants: A Retail
Perspective,” Journal of Marketing Research 33
(February 1996), pp. 9–21.
65. Adam Bass, “Licensed Extension—Stretching to
Communicate,” Journal of Brand Management 12
(September 2004), pp. 31–38; also see David A. Aaker,
Building Strong Brands (New York: Free Press, 1996).
66. Jean Halliday, “Troubled Automakers’ Golden Goose,”
AutoWeek, August 14, 2006; Becky Ebenkamp,
“The Creative License,” Brandweek, June 9, 2003,
pp. 36–40; “Top 100 Global Licensors,” License!
Global, April 1, 2009.
67. For comprehensive corporate branding guidelines, see
James R. Gregory, The Best of Branding: Best Practices
in Corporate Branding (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004).
For some international perspectives, see Majken
Schultz, Mary Jo Hatch, and Mogens Holten Larsen,
eds., The Expressive Organization: Linking Identity,
Reputation, and Corporate Brand (Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2000); and Majken Schultz, Yun Mi
Antorini, and Fabian F. Csaba, eds., Corporate
Branding: Purpose, People, and Process (Denmark:
Copenhagen Business School Press, 2005).
68. Guido Berens, Cees B. M. van Riel, and Gerrit H. van
Bruggen, “Corporate Associations and Consumer
Product Responses: The Moderating Role of Corporate
Brand Dominance,” Journal of Marketing 69 (July 2005),
pp. 35–48; Zeynep Gürhan-Canli and Rajeev Batra,

E24

Endnotes

“When Corporate Image Affects Product Evaluations:
The Moderating Role of Perceived Risk,” Journal of
Marketing Research 41 (May 2004), pp. 197–205; Kevin
Lane Keller and David A. Aaker, “Corporate-Level
Marketing: The Impact of Credibility on a Company’s
Brand Extensions,” Corporate Reputation Review 1
(August 1998), pp. 356–78; Thomas J. Brown and Peter
Dacin, “The Company and the Product: Corporate
Associations and Consumer Product Responses,”
Journal of Marketing 61 (January 1997), pp. 68–84;
Gabriel J. Biehal and Daniel A. Sheinin, “The Influence
of Corporate Messages on the Product Portfolio,”
Journal of Marketing 71 (April 2007), pp. 12–25.
69. Vithala R. Rao, Manoj K. Agarwal, and Denise Dalhoff,
“How Is Manifest Branding Strategy Related to the
Intangible Value of a Corporation?” Journal of
Marketing 68 (October 2004), pp. 126–41. For an
examination of the financial impact of brand portfolio
decisions, see Neil A. Morgan and Lopo L. Rego,
“Brand Portfolio Strategy and Firm Performance,”
Journal of Marketing 73 (January 2009), pp. 59–74; S.
Cem Bahadir, Sundar G. Bharadwaj, and Rajendra K.
Srivastava, “Financial Value of Brands in Mergers and
Acquisitions: Is Value in the Eye of the Beholder?”
Journal of Marketing 72 (November 2008), pp. 49–64.
70. William J. Holstein, “The Incalculable Value of Building
Brands,” Chief Executive, April–May 2006, pp. 52–56.
71. David A. Aaker, Brand Portfolio Strategy: Creating
Relevance, Differentiation, Energy, Leverage, and
Clarity (New York: Free Press, 2004).
72. Christopher Hosford, “A Transformative Experience,”
Sales & Marketing Management 158 (June 2006),
pp. 32–36; Mike Beirne and Javier Benito, “Starwood
Uses Personnel to Personalize Marketing,” Brandweek,
April 24, 2006, p. 9.
73. Jack Trout, Differentiate or Die: Survival in Our Era of
Killer Competition (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2000); Kamalini Ramdas and Mohanbir Sawhney, “A
Cross-Functional Approach to Evaluating Multiple Line
Extensions for Assembled Products,” Management
Science 47 (January 2001), pp. 22–36.
74. Nirmalya Kumar, “Kill a Brand, Keep a Customer,”
Harvard Business Review, December 2003, pp. 87–95.
75. For a methodological approach for assessing the extent
and nature of cannibalization, see Charlotte H. Mason
and George R. Milne, “An Approach for Identifying
Cannibalization within Product Line Extensions and
Multibrand Strategies,” Journal of Business Research
31 (October–November 1994), pp. 163–70.
76. Mark Ritson, “Should You Launch a Fighter Brand?”
Harvard Business Review, October 2009, pp. 87–94.
77. Paul W. Farris, “The Chevrolet Corvette,” Case
UVA-M-320, The Darden Graduate Business School
Foundation, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 1988.
78. Byung-Do Kim and Mary W. Sullivan, “The Effect of
Parent Brand Experience on Line Extension Trial and
Repeat Purchase,” Marketing Letters 9 (April 1998),
pp. 181–93.

79. John Milewicz and Paul Herbig, “Evaluating the Brand
Extension Decision Using a Model of Reputation
Building,” Journal of Product & Brand Management 3
(January 1994), pp. 39–47; Kevin Lane Keller and
David A. Aaker, “The Effects of Sequential Introduction
of Brand Extensions,” Journal of Marketing Research
29 (February 1992), pp. 35–50.
80. Valarie A. Taylor and William O. Bearden, “Ad
Spending on Brand Extensions: Does Similarity
Matter?” Journal of Brand Management 11
(September 2003), pp. 63–74; Sheri Bridges, Kevin
Lane Keller, and Sanjay Sood, “Communication
Strategies for Brand Extensions: Enhancing Perceived
Fit by Establishing Explanatory Links,” Journal of
Advertising 29 (Winter 2000), pp. 1–11; Daniel C.
Smith, “Brand Extension and Advertising Efficiency:
What Can and Cannot Be Expected,” Journal of
Advertising Research (November–December 1992),
pp. 11–20; Daniel C. Smith and C. Whan Park, “The
Effects of Brand Extensions on Market Share and
Advertising Efficiency,” Journal of Marketing Research
29 (August 1992), pp. 296–313.
81. Ralf van der Lans, Rik Pieters, and Michel Wedel,
“Competitive Brand Salience,” Marketing Science 27
(September–October 2008), pp. 922–31.
82. Subramanian Balachander and Sanjoy Ghose,
“Reciprocal Spillover Effects: A Strategic Benefit of
Brand Extensions,” Journal of Marketing 67 (January
2003), pp. 4–13.
83. Bharat N. Anand and Ron Shachar, “Brands as
Beacons: A New Source of Loyalty to Multiproduct
Firms,” Journal of Marketing Research 41 (May 2004),
pp. 135–50.
84. Kevin Lane Keller and David A. Aaker, “The Effects of
Sequential Introduction of Brand Extensions,” Journal of
Marketing Research 29 (February 1992), pp. 35–50. For
consumer processing implications, see Huifung Mao
and H. Shanker Krishnan, “Effects of Prototype and
Exemplar Fit on Brand Extension Evaluations: A TwoProcess Contingency Model,” Journal of Consumer
Research 33 (June 2006), pp. 41–49; Byung Chul Shine,
Jongwon Park, and Robert S. Wyer Jr., “Brand Synergy
Effects in Multiple Brand Extensions,” Journal of
Marketing Research 44 (November 2007), pp. 663–70.
85. Maureen Morrin, “The Impact of Brand Extensions on
Parent Brand Memory Structures and Retrieval
Processes,” Journal of Marketing Research 36
(November 1999), pp. 517–25; John A. Quelch and
David Kenny, “Extend Profits, Not Product Lines,”
Harvard Business Review, September–October 1994,
pp. 153–60; Perspectives from the Editors, “The Logic
of Product-Line Extensions,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1994, pp. 53–62.
86. Al Ries and Jack Trout, Positioning: The Battle for
Your Mind, 20th Anniversary Edition (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2000).
87. David A. Aaker, Brand Portfolio Strategy: Creating
Relevance, Differentiation, Energy, Leverage, and
Clarity (New York: Free Press, 2004).

88. Mary W. Sullivan, “Measuring Image Spillovers in
Umbrella-Branded Products,” Journal of Business 63
(July 1990), pp. 309–29.
89. Deborah Roedder John, Barbara Loken, and
Christopher Joiner, “The Negative Impact of
Extensions: Can Flagship Products Be Diluted,”
Journal of Marketing 62 (January 1998), pp. 19–32;
Susan M. Broniarcyzk and Joseph W. Alba, “The
Importance of the Brand in Brand Extension,” Journal
of Marketing Research 31 (May 1994), pp. 214–28 (this
entire issue of JMR is devoted to brands and brand
equity); Barbara Loken and Deborah Roedder John,
“Diluting Brand Beliefs: When Do Brand Extensions
Have a Negative Impact?” Journal of Marketing 57
(July 1993), pp. 71–84. See also, Chris Pullig, Carolyn
Simmons, and Richard G. Netemeyer, “Brand Dilution:
When Do New Brands Hurt Existing Brands?” Journal
of Marketing 70 (April 2006), pp. 52–66; R. Ahluwalia
and Z. Gürhan-Canli, “The Effects of Extensions on
the Family Brand Name: An Accessibility-Diagnosticity
Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research 27
(December 2000), pp. 371–81; Z. Gürhan-Canli and M.
Durairaj, “The Effects of Extensions on Brand Name
Dilution and Enhancement,” Journal of Marketing
Research 35 (November 1998), pp. 464–73; S. J.
Milberg, C. W. Park, and M. S. McCarthy, “Managing
Negative Feedback Effects Associated with Brand
Extensions: The Impact of Alternative Branding
Strategies,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 6 (1997),
pp. 119–40.
90. See also, Franziska Völckner and Henrik Sattler,
“Drivers of Brand Extension Success,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (April 2006), pp. 1–17.
91. For recent research on extension evaluations, see
Alokparna Basu Monga and Deborah Roedder John,
“Cultural Differences in Brand Extension Evaluation:
The Influence of Analytical versus Holistic Thinking,”
Journal of Marketing Research 33 (March 2007), pp.
529–36; James L. Oakley, Adam Duhachek,
Subramanian Balachander, and S. Sriram, “Order of
Entry and the Moderating Role of Comparison Brands
in Extension Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer
Research 34 (February 2008), pp. 706–12; Junsang
Yeo and Jongwon Park, “Effects of Parent-Extension
Similarity and Self Regulatory Focus on Evaluations of
Brand Extensions,” Journal of Consumer Psychology
16 (2006), pp. 272–82; Catherine W. M. Yeung and
Robert S. Wyer, “Does Loving a Brand Mean Loving
Its Products? The Role of Brand-Elicited Affect in
Brand Extension Evaluations,” Journal of Marketing
Research 43 (November 2005), pp. 495–506; Huifang
Mao and H. Shankar Krishnan, “Effects of Prototype
and Exemplar Fit on Brand Extension Evaluations:
A Two-Process Contingency Model,” Journal of
Consumer Research 33 (June 2006), pp. 41–49; Rohini
Ahluwalia, “How Far Can a Brand Stretch?
Understanding the Role of Self-Construal,” Journal of
Marketing Research 45 (June 2008), pp. 337–50.
92. Pierre Berthon, Morris B. Holbrook, James M. Hulbert,
and Leyland F. Pitt, “Viewing Brands in Multiple
Endnotes

E25

Dimensions,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Winter
2007), pp. 37–43.
93. Andrea Rothman, “France’s Bic Bets U.S. Consumers
Will Go for Perfume on the Cheap,” Wall Street
Journal, January 12, 1989.
94. Roland T. Rust, Valerie A. Zeithaml, and Katherine A.
Lemon, “Measuring Customer Equity and Calculating
Marketing ROI,” Rajiv Grover and Marco Vriens, eds.,
Handbook of Marketing Research (Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, 2006), pp. 588–601; Roland T.
Rust, Valerie A. Zeithaml, and Katherine A. Lemon,
Driving Customer Equity (New York: Free Press, 2000).
95. Robert C. Blattberg and John Deighton, “Manage
Marketing by the Customer Equity Test,” Harvard
Business Review, July–August 1996, pp. 136–44.
96. Robert C. Blattberg and Jacquelyn S. Thomas,
“Valuing, Analyzing, and Managing the Marketing
Function Using Customer Equity Principles,” Dawn
Iacobucci, ed., Kellogg on Marketing (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 2002); Robert C. Blattberg, Gary
Getz, and Jacquelyn S. Thomas, Customer Equity:
Building and Managing Relationships as Valuable
Assets (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2001).
97. Much of this section is based on: Robert Leone,
Vithala Rao, Kevin Lane Keller, Man Luo, Leigh
McAlister, and Rajendra Srivatstava, “Linking Brand
Equity to Customer Equity,” Journal of Service
Research 9 (November 2006), pp. 125–38. This special
issue is devoted to customer equity and has a number
of thought-provoking articles.
98. Niraj Dawar, “What Are Brands Good For?” MIT Sloan
Management Review (Fall 2004), pp. 31–37.

Chapter 10
1. Ilana DeBare, “Cleaning Up without Dot-coms,” San
Francisco Chronicle, October 8, 2006; “Marketers of
the Next Generation,” Brandweek, April 17, 2006, p. 30.
2. Al Ries and Jack Trout, Positioning: The Battle for Your
Mind, 20th Anniversary Edition (New York: McGrawHill, 2000).
3. Nat Ives, “Donaton: EW Is Not a Celebrity Magazine,”
Advertising Age, June 23, 2008, p. 12.
4. Michael J. Lanning and Lynn W. Phillips, “Building
Market-Focused Organizations,” Gemini Consulting
White Paper, 1991.
5. Kevin Maney, “Hello, Ma Google,” Condé Nast
Portfolio, October 2007, pp. 49–50.
6. David A. Aaker, “The Relevance of Brand Relevance,”
Strategy+Business 35 (Summer 2004), pp. 1–10; David
A. Aaker, Brand Portfolio Strategy: Creating Relevance,
Differentiation, Energy, Leverage, and Clarity (New
York: Free Press, 2004).
7. Elaine Wong, “Unilever Marketer Reveals Bertolli’s
Secret Sauce,” Brandweek, August 28, 2009.
8. Allan D. Shocker, “Determining the Structure of ProductMarkets: Practices, Issues, and Suggestions,” Barton A.
Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing
E26

Endnotes

(London: Sage, 2002), pp. 106–25. See also, Bruce H.
Clark and David B. Montgomery, “Managerial
Identification of Competitors,” Journal of Marketing 63
(July 1999), pp. 67–83.
9. “What Business Are You In? Classic Advice from
Theodore Levitt,” Harvard Business Review, October
2006, pp. 127–37. See also Theodore Levitt’s seminal
article, “Marketing Myopia,” Harvard Business Review,
July–August 1960, pp. 45–56.
10. Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski,
e-Commerce (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), p. 53.
11. Richard A. D’Aveni, “Competitive Pressure Systems:
Mapping and Managing Multimarket Contact,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (Fall 2002), pp. 39–49.
12. For discussion of some of the long-term implications of
marketing activities, see Koen Pauwels, “How Dynamic
Consumer Response, Competitor Response, Company
Support, and Company Inertia Shape Long-Term
Marketing Effectiveness,” Marketing Science 23 (Fall
2004), pp. 596–610; Koen Pauwels, Dominique M.
Hanssens, and S. Siddarth, “The Long-term Effects of
Price Promotions on Category Incidence, Brand
Choice, and Purchase Quantity,” Journal of Marketing
Research 34 (November 2002), pp. 421–39; and Marnik
Dekimpe and Dominique Hanssens, “Sustained
Spending and Persistent Response: A New Look at
Long-term Marketing Profitability,” Journal of Marketing
Research 36 (November 1999), pp. 397–412.
13. Kevin Lane Keller, Brian Sternthal, and Alice Tybout,
“Three Questions You Need to Ask about Your
Brand,” Harvard Business Review, September 2002,
pp. 80–89.
14. Michael Applebaum, “Comfy to Cool: A Brand Swivel,”
Brandweek, May 2, 2005, pp. 18–19.
15. Thomas A. Brunner and Michaela Wänke, “The
Reduced and Enhanced Impact of Shared Features on
Individual Brand Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 16 (April 2006), pp. 101–11.
16. Professor Brian Sternthal, “Miller Lite Case,” Kellogg
Graduate School of Management, Northwestern
University.
17. Scott Bedbury, A New Brand World (New York: Viking
Press, 2002).
18. Patrick Tickle, Kevin Lane Keller, and Keith Richey,
“Branding in High-Technology Markets,” Market Leader
22 (Autumn 2003), pp. 21–26.
19. Jim Hopkins, “When the Devil Is in the Design,” USA
Today, December 31, 2001.
20. Keith Naughton, “Ford’s ‘Perfect Storm,’” Newsweek,
September 17, 2001, pp. 48–50.
21. Susan M. Broniarczyk and Andrew D. Gershoff, “The
Reciprocal Effects of Brand Equity and Trivial
Attributes,” Journal of Marketing Research 40 (May
2003), pp. 161–75; Gregory S. Carpenter, Rashi Glazer,
and Kent Nakamoto, “Meaningful Brands from
Meaningless Differentiation: The Dependence on
Irrelevant Attributes,” Journal of Marketing Research
31 (August 1994), pp. 339–50.

22. Kerry Capell, “Thinking Simple at Philips,”
BusinessWeek, December 11, 2006, p. 50; Philips,
www.philips.com.
23. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for
Analyzing Industries and Competitors (New York: Free
Press, 1980).
24. Francis J. Kelly III and Barry Silverstein, The Breakaway
Brand (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005).
25. Willow Duttge, “Counting Sleep,” Advertising Age, June
5, 2006, pp. 4, 50.
26. Patrick Barwise, Simply Better: Winning and Keeping
Customers by Delivering What Matters Most (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2004).
27. Louise Lee, “Can Progressive Stay in Gear?”
BusinessWeek, August 8, 2004, p. 44; Robert J. Dolan
and Hermann Simon, “Power Pricers,” Across the
Board, May 1997, pp. 18–19; Carol J. Loomis, “Sex.
Reefer? And Auto Insurance,” Fortune, August 7, 1995,
p. 76; Progressive, www.progressive.com.
28. “The 25 Best Sales Forces,” Sales & Marketing
Management (July 1998), pp. 32–50.
29. William C. Copacino, Supply Chain Management (Boca
Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press, 1997).
30. Piet Levy, “Express Yourself, Marketing News, June 15,
2009, p. 6.
31. James H. Gilmore and B. Joseph Pine II, Authenticity:
What Consumers Really Want (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 2007); Lynn B.
Upshaw, Truth: The New Rules for Marketing in a
Skeptical World (New York: AMACOM, 2007).
32. Owen Jenkins, “Gimme Some Lovin’,” Marketing News,
May 15, 2009, p. 19.
33. Heather Landi, “Raise a Glass,” Beverage World,
October 2009, pp. 16–19.
34. Marc Gobé, Emotional Branding: The New Paradigm
for Connecting Brands to People (New York: Allworth
Press, 2001).
35. Kevin Roberts, Lovemarks: The Future Beyond Brands,
expanded edition (New York: Powerhouse Books,
2005); Kevin Roberts, The Lovemarks Effect: Winning
in the Consumer Revolution (New York: Powerhouse
Books, 2005); “The Lovemarks Heart Beat: January
2010,” Lovemarks, www.lovemarks.com.
36. Hamish Pringle and Peter Field, “Why Emotional
Messages Beat Rational Ones,” Advertising Age,
March 2, 2009, p. 13; Hamish Pringle and Peter Field,
Brand Immortality: How Brands Can Live Long and
Prosper (Philadelphia: Kogan Page, 2009).
37. Rajendra S. Sisodia, David B. Wolfe, and Jagdish N.
Sheth, Firms of Endearment: How World-Class
Companies Benefit Profit from Passion & Purpose
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing,
2007).
38. Ronald Grover, “Selling by Storytelling,”
BusinessWeek, May 25, 2009.
39. Randall Ringer and Michael Thibodeau, “A
Breakthrough Approach to Brand Creation,” Verse, The
Narrative Branding Company, www.versegroup.com.

40. Patrick Hanlon, Primal Branding: Create Zealots for
Your Brand, Your Company, and Your Future (New
York: Free Press, 2006); ThinkTopia,
www.thinktopia.com.
41. Hillary Chura, “McD’s Mass Marketing Loses Luster,”
Crain’s Chicago Business, June 16, 2004.
42. Douglas Holt, How Brands Become Icons: The
Principle of Cultural Branding (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 2004); Douglas Holt,
“Branding as Cultural Activism,” www.zibs.com;
Douglas Holt, “What Becomes an Icon Most,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2003, pp. 43–49; See also,
Grant McKracken, Culture and Consumption II:
Markets, Meaning, and Brand Management
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2005).
43. Craig Thompson, “Brands as Culturally Embedded
Resources,” 43rd AMA Sheth Foundation Doctoral
Consortium, University of Missouri, June 6, 2008. See
also research by John Sherry and Robert Kozinets,
including John F. Sherry Jr., Robert V. Kozinets, Adam
Duhachek, Benét DeBerry-Spence, Krittinee
Nuttavuthisit and Diana Storm, “Gendered Behavior in
a Male Preserve: Role Playing at ESPN Zone Chicago,”
Journal of Consumer Psychology 14, nos. 1 & 2 (2004),
pp. 151–58; Stephen Brown, Robert V. Kozinets, and
John F. Sherry Jr., “Teaching Old Brands New Tricks:
Retro Branding and the Revival of Brand Meaning,”
Journal of Marketing 67 (July 2003), pp. 19–33.
44. Nick Wreden, Fusion Branding: How to Forge Your
Brand for the Future (Atlanta: Accountability Press,
2002); Fusion Branding, www.fusionbranding.com.
45. Andrew Ross Sorkin and Andrew Martin, “Coca-Cola
Agrees to Buy Vitaminwater,” New York Times, May 26,
2007.
46. Jeffrey Gangemi, “Small Company, Big Brand,”
BusinessWeek, August 28, 2006.
47. Kurt Badenhausen and Christina Settimi, “What’s
New,” Forbes, October 27, 2008, p. 133.

Chapter 11
1. Luke Mullins, “Muscling Up in Sports Gear,” U.S. News
& World Report, December 10, 2007, pp. 57–58;
Jeremy Mullman, “Protecting This Brand While
Running Ahead,” Advertising Age, January 12, 2009,
p. 16; Elaine Wong, “Under Armour Makes a Long-Run
Calculation,” Brandweek, January 19, 2009, p. 28;
Stephanie N. Mehta, “Under Armour Reboots,”
Fortune, February 2, 2009, pp. 29–33.
2. For a detailed academic treatment of a number of
issues on competition, see the Special Issue on
Competitive Responsiveness, Marketing Science 24
(Winter 2005).
3. Sandra Ward, “Warming Up the Copier,” Barron’s, May
1, 2006, pp. 19, 21; William M. Bulkeley, “Xerox Tries to
Go Beyond Copiers,” Wall Street Journal, February 24,
2009, p. B5; Nanette Byrnes and Roger O. Crockett,
“An Historic Succession at Xerox,” BusinessWeek,
June 8, 2009, pp. 18–22.
Endnotes

E27

4. Starbucks, www.starbucks.com/aboutus/overview.asp,
December 1, 2009.
5. Brian Wansink, “Can Package Size Accelerate Usage
Volume?” Journal of Marketing 60 (July 1996),
pp. 1–14; See also, Priya Raghubir and Eric A.
Greenleaf, “Ratios in Proportion: What Should the
Shape of the Package Be?” Journal of Marketing 70
(April 2006), pp. 95–107; and Valerie Folkes and Shashi
Matta, “The Effect of Package Shape on Consumers’
Judgments of Product Volume: Attention as a Mental
Contaminant,” Journal of Consumer Research 31
(September 2004), pp. 390–401.
6. John D. Cripps, “Heuristics and Biases in Timing the
Replacement of Durable Products,” Journal of
Consumer Research 21 (September 1994), pp. 304–18.
7. George Stalk Jr. and Rob Lachanauer, “Hardball: Five
Killer Strategies for Trouncing the Competition,”
Harvard Business Review, April 2004, pp. 62–71;
Richard D’Aveni, “The Empire Strikes Back:
Counterrevolutionary Strategies for Industry Leaders,”
Harvard Business Review, November 2002, pp. 66–74.
8. Nirmalya Kumar, Lisa Sheer, and Philip Kotler, “From
Market Driven to Market Driving,” European
Management Journal 18 (April 2000), pp. 129–42.
9. Much of the remaining section on proactive marketing
is based on a provocative book by Leonardo Araujo
and Rogerio Gava, The Proactive Enterprise: How to
Anticipate Market Changes (In Press).
10. Jonathan Glancey, “The Private World of the
Walkman,” Guardian, October 11, 1999.
11. These six defense strategies, as well as the five attack
strategies, are taken from Philip Kotler and Ravi Singh,
“Marketing Warfare in the 1980s,” Journal of Business
Strategy (Winter 1981), pp. 30–41.
12. Michael E. Porter, “Market Signals, Competitive
Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors (New York: Free Press, 1998), pp. 75–87;
Jaideep Prabhu and David W. Stewart, “Signaling
Strategies in Competitive Interaction: Building
Reputations and Hiding the Truth,” Journal of
Marketing Research 38 (February 2001), pp. 62–72.
13. Roger J. Calantone and Kim E. Schatzel, “Strategic
Foretelling: Communication-Based Antecedents of a
Firm’s Propensity to Preannounce,” Journal of
Marketing 64 (January 2000), pp. 17–30; Jehoshua
Eliashberg and Thomas S. Robertson, “New Product
Preannouncing Behavior: A Market Signaling Study,”
Journal of Marketing Research 25 (August 1988),
pp. 282–92.
14. Thomas S. Robertson, Jehoshua Eliashberg, and Talia
Rymon, “New-Product Announcement Signals and
Incumbent Reactions,” Journal of Marketing 59 (July
1995), pp. 1–15.
15. Yuhong Wu, Sridhar Balasubramanian, and Vijay
Mahajan, “When Is a Preannounced New Product
Likely to Be Delayed?” Journal of Marketing 68 (April
2004), pp. 101–13; Barry L. Bayus, Sanjay Jain, and
Ambar G. Rao, “Truth or Consequences: An Analysis
of Vaporware and New-Product Announcements,”
E28

Endnotes

Journal of Marketing Research 38 (February 2001),
pp. 3–13.
16. Kevin Kelleher, “Why FedEx Is Gaining Ground,”
Business 2.0, October 2003, pp. 56–57; Charles
Haddad, “FedEx: Gaining on Ground,” BusinessWeek,
December 16, 2002, pp. 126–28.
17. “Sara Lee Cleans Out Its Cupboards,” Fortune, March
7, 2005, p. 38; Jane Sassen, “How Sara Lee Left
Hanes in Its Skivvies,” BusinessWeek, September 18,
2006, p. 40.
18. J. Scott Armstrong and Kesten C. Green, “CompetitorOriented Objectives: The Myth of Market Share,”
International Journal of Business 12 (Winter 2007),
pp. 115–34; Stuart E. Jackson, Where Value Hides:
A New Way to Uncover Profitable Growth for Your
Business (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2006).
19. Nirmalya Kumar, Marketing as Strategy (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2004); Philip
Kotler and Paul N. Bloom, “Strategies for High-MarketShare Companies,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1975, pp. 63–72.
20. Robert D. Buzzell and Frederick D. Wiersema,
“Successful Share-Building Strategies,” Harvard
Business Review, January–February 1981,
pp. 135–44.
21. Linda Hellofs and Robert Jacobson, “Market Share
and Customer’s Perceptions of Quality: When Can
Firms Grow Their Way to Higher versus Lower
Quality?” Journal of Marketing 63 (January 1999),
pp. 16–25.
22. John Downey, “FairPoint Struggles with Merger,
Declining Stock,” Charlotte Business Journal, March
19, 2009; John Downey, FairPoint Faces Enduring
Debt, Service Headaches,” Charlotte Business Journal,
September 15, 2009.
23. Jon Birger, “Second-Mover Advantage,” Fortune,
March 20, 2006, pp. 20–21.
24. This paragraph is based on a talk by John Bello at the
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College on
November 18, 2010.
25. Venkatesh Shankar, Gregory Carpenter, and Lakshman
Krishnamurthi, “Late-Mover Advantage: How
Innovative Late Entrants Outsell Pioneers,” Journal of
Marketing Research 35 (February 1998), pp. 54–70;
Gregory S. Carpenter and Kent Nakamoto, “The
Impact of Consumer Preference Formation on
Marketing Objectives and Competitive Second-Mover
Strategies,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 5 (1996),
pp. 325–58; Gregory S. Carpenter and Kent Nakamoto,
“Competitive Strategies for Late Entry into a Market
with a Dominant Brand,” Management Science
(October 1990), pp. 1268–78.
26. Megan Johnston, “The Ketchup Strategy,” Forbes,
November 13, 2006, p. 185.
27. Michael V. Copeland, “These Boots Really Were Made
for Walking,” Business 2.0, October 2004, pp. 72–74.
28. Katrina Booker, “The Pepsi Machine,” Fortune, February
6, 2006, pp. 68–72.

29. Theodore Levitt, “Innovative Imitation,” Harvard
Business Review, September–October 1966, p. 63.
Also see, Steven P. Schnaars, Managing Imitation
Strategies: How Later Entrants Seize Markets from
Pioneers (New York: Free Press, 1994).
30. Stuart F. Brown, “The Company That Out-Harleys
Harley,” Fortune, September 28, 1998, pp. 56–57; S&S
Cycle, www.sscycle.com.
31. Melita Marie Garza, “Illinois Tool Works Stock
Continues to Suffer Since Acquisition of Firm,” Chicago
Tribune, November 16, 2000; ITW, www.itw.com.
32. Jayne O’Donnell, “Family Rolling to Success on Tire
Rack,” USA Today, December 8, 2003.
33. Mark Morrison, “This Wildcatter Feels Right at Home in
Gabon,” BusinessWeek, June 5, 2006, p. 63.
34. Reported in E. R. Linneman and L. J. Stanton, Making
Niche Marketing Work (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
35. Thomas A. Fogarty, “Keeping Zippo’s Flame Eternal,”
USA Today, June 24, 2003; Michael Learmonth, “Zippo
Reignites Brand with Social Media, New Products,
Advertising Age, August 10, 2009, p. 12; Zippo,
www.zippo.com.
36. Kathleen Kingsbury, “The Cell Islands,” Time,
November 20, 2006, p. G20; “Traveling Made Easy
with the New BlackBerry Curve 8520,” Digicel-News,
http://digicel-jamaica-news-procomm.blogspot.com,
January 12, 2010.
37. Some authors distinguished additional stages. Wasson
suggested a stage of competitive turbulence between
growth and maturity. See Chester R. Wasson, Dynamic
Competitive Strategy and Product Life Cycles (Austin,
TX: Austin Press, 1978). Maturity describes a stage of
sales growth slowdown and saturation, a stage of flat
sales after sales have peaked.
38. John E. Swan and David R. Rink, “Fitting Market
Strategy to Varying Product Life Cycles,” Business
Horizons, January–February 1982, pp. 72–76; Gerald J.
Tellis and C. Merle Crawford, “An Evolutionary
Approach to Product Growth Theory,” Journal of
Marketing 45 (Fall 1981), pp. 125–34.
39. William E. Cox Jr., “Product Life Cycles as Marketing
Models,” Journal of Business (October 1967), pp. 375–84.
40. Jordan P. Yale, “The Strategy of Nylon’s Growth,”
Modern Textiles Magazine, February 1964, p. 32. Also
see Theodore Levitt, “Exploit the Product Life Cycle,”
Harvard Business Review, November–December 1965,
pp. 81–94.
41. Chester R. Wasson, “How Predictable Are Fashion and
Other Product Life Cycles?” Journal of Marketing 32
(July 1968), pp. 36–43.
42. Ibid.
43. William H. Reynolds, “Cars and Clothing:
Understanding Fashion Trends,” Journal of Marketing 32
(July 1968), pp. 44–49.
44. Bryan Curtis, “Trivial Pursuit,” Slate.com, April 13,
2005; Patrick Butters, “What Biggest-Selling Adult
Game Still Cranks Out Vexing Questions?” Insight on
the News, January 26, 1998, p. 39.

45. Robert D. Buzzell, “Competitive Behavior and Product
Life Cycles,” John S. Wright and Jack Goldstucker,
eds., New Ideas for Successful Marketing (Chicago:
American Marketing Association, 1956), p. 51.
46. Rajesh J. Chandy, Gerard J. Tellis, Deborah J.
MacInnis, and Pattana Thaivanich, “What to Say When:
Advertising Appeals in Evolving Markets,” Journal of
Marketing Research 38 (November 2001), pp. 399–414.
47. As reported in Joseph T. Vesey, “The New
Competitors: They Think in Terms of Speed to
Market,” Academy of Management Executive 5
(May 1991), pp. 23–33; and Brian Dumaine, “How
Managers Can Succeed through Speed,” Fortune,
February 13, 1989, pp. 54–59.
48. Glen L. Urban et al., “Market Share Rewards to
Pioneering Brands: An Empirical Analysis and Strategic
Implications,” Management Science (June 1986),
pp. 645–59; William T. Robinson and Claes Fornell,
“Sources of Market Pioneer Advantages in Consumer
Goods Industries,” Journal of Marketing Research 22
(August 1985), pp. 305–17.
49. Gregory S. Carpenter and Kent Nakamoto, “Consumer
Preference Formation and Pioneering Advantage,”
Journal of Marketing Research 26 (August 1989),
pp. 285–98.
50. William T. Robinson and Sungwook Min, “Is the First to
Market the First to Fail? Empirical Evidence for
Industrial Goods Businesses,” Journal of Marketing
Research 39 (February 2002), pp. 120–28.
51. Frank R. Kardes, Gurumurthy Kalyanaram, Murali
Chankdrashekaran, and Ronald J. Dornoff, “Brand
Retrieval, Consideration Set Composition, Consumer
Choice, and the Pioneering Advantage,” Journal of
Consumer Research 20 (June 1993), pp. 62–75. See
also, Frank H. Alpert and Michael A. Kamins, “Pioneer
Brand Advantage and Consumer Behavior: A
Conceptual Framework and Propositional Inventory,”
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 22
(June 1994), pp. 244–53.
52. Kurt A. Carlson, Margaret G. Meloy, and J. Edward
Russo, “Leader-Driven Primacy: Using Attribute Order
to Affect Consumer Choice,” Journal of Consumer
Research 32 (March 2006), pp. 513–18.
53. Thomas S. Robertson and Hubert Gatignon, “How
Innovators Thwart New Entrants into Their Market,”
Planning Review, September–October 1991, pp. 4–11,
48; Douglas Bowman and Hubert Gatignon, “Order of
Entry as a Moderator of the Effect of Marketing Mix on
Market Share,” Marketing Science 15 (Summer 1996),
pp. 222–42.
54. Venkatesh Shankar, Gregory S. Carpenter, and
Lakshman Krishnamurthi, “Late Mover Advantage:
How Innovative Late Entrants Outsell Pioneers,”
Journal of Marketing Research 35 (February 1998),
pp. 54–70.
55. Steven P. Schnaars, Managing Imitation Strategies (New
York: Free Press, 1994). See also, Jin K. Han, Namwoon
Kim, and Hony-Bom Kin, “Entry Barriers: A Dull-, One-,
or Two-Edged Sword for Incumbents? Unraveling the
Endnotes

E29

Paradox from a Contingency Perspective,” Journal of
Marketing 65 (January 2001), pp. 1–14.
56. Victor Kegan, “Second Sight: Second Movers Take
All,” The Guardian, October 10, 2002.
57. Peter N. Golder, “Historical Method in Marketing
Research with New Evidence on Long-term Market
Share Stability,” Journal of Marketing Research 37
(May 2000), pp. 156–72; Peter N. Golder and Gerald J.
Tellis, “Pioneer Advantage: Marketing Logic or
Marketing Legend?” Journal of Marketing Research 30
(May 1993), pp. 34–46. See also, Shi Zhang and Arthur
B. Markman, “Overcoming the Early Advantage: The
Role of Alignable and Nonalignable Differences,”
Journal of Marketing Research 35 (November 1998),
pp. 1–15.
58. Gerald Tellis and Peter Golder, Will and Vision: How
Latecomers Can Grow to Dominate Markets (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2001); Rajesh K. Chandy and Gerald J.
Tellis, “The Incumbent’s Curse? Incumbency, Size, and
Radical Product Innovation,” Journal of Marketing
Research 64 (July 2000), pp. 1–17.
59. Sungwook Min, Manohar U. Kalwani, and William T.
Robinson, “Market Pioneer and Early Follower Survival
Risks: A Contingency Analysis of Really New Versus
Incrementally New Product-Markets,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (January 2006), pp. 15–35. See also Raji
Srinivasan, Gary L. Lilien, and Arvind Rangaswamy,
“First In, First Out? The Effects of Network Externalities
on Pioneer Survival,” Journal of Marketing 68 (January
2004), pp. 41–58.
60. Trond Riiber Knudsen, “Escaping the Middle-Market
Trap: An Interview with CEO of Electrolux,” McKinsey
Quarterly (December 2006), pp. 72–79.
61. Rajan Varadarajan, Mark P. DeFanti, and Paul S.
Busch, “Brand Portfolio, Corporate Image, and
Reputation: Managing Brand Deletions,” Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science 34 (Spring 2006), pp.
195–205; Stephen J. Carlotti Jr., Mary Ellen Coe, and
Jesko Perrey, “Making Brand Portfolios Work,”
McKinsey Quarterly 4 (2004), pp. 24–36; Nirmalya
Kumar, “Kill a Brand, Keep a Customer,” Harvard
Business Review, December 2003, pp. 86–95; George
J. Avlonitis, “Product Elimination Decision Making:
Does Formality Matter?” Journal of Marketing 49
(Winter 1985), pp. 41–52; Philip Kotler, “Phasing Out
Weak Products,” Harvard Business Review,
March–April 1965, pp. 107–18.
62. Kathryn Rudie Harrigan, “The Effect of Exit Barriers
upon Strategic Flexibility,” Strategic Management
Journal 1 (February 1980), pp. 165–76.
63. Laurence P. Feldman and Albert L. Page, “Harvesting:
The Misunderstood Market Exit Strategy,” Journal of
Business Strategy (Spring 1985), pp. 79–85; Philip
Kotler, “Harvesting Strategies for Weak Products,”
Business Horizons, August 1978, pp. 15–22.
64. Rob Walker, “Can Ghost Brands . . .,” International
Herald Tribune, May 17–18, 2008, pp. 17–18; Peter
Carbona, “The Rush to Grab Orphan Brands,”
BusinessWeek, August 3, 2009, pp. 47–48.

E30

Endnotes

65. Stuart Elliott, “Those Shelved Brands Start to Look
Tempting,” New York Times, August 21, 2008.
66. Peter N. Golder and Gerard J. Tellis, “Growing,
Growing, Gone: Cascades, Diffusion, and Turning
Points in the Product Life Cycle,” Marketing Science
23 (Spring 2004), pp. 207–18.
67. Youngme Moon, “Break Free from the Product
Life Cycle,” Harvard Business Review, May 2005,
pp. 87–94.
68. Hubert Gatignon and David Soberman, “Competitive
Response and Market Evolution,” Barton A. Weitz and
Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London,
UK: Sage Publications, 2002), pp. 126–47; Robert D.
Buzzell, “Market Functions and Market Evolution,”
Journal of Marketing 63 (Special Issue 1999),
pp. 61–63.
69. Raji Srinivasan, Arvind Rangaswamy, and Gary L.
Lilien, “Turning Adversity into Advantage: Does
Proactive Marketing During Recession Pay Off?”
International Journal of Research in Marketing 22
(June 2005), pp. 109–25.
70. Jon Fine, “Why General Mills Marketing Pays Off,”
BusinessWeek, July 27, 2009, pp. 67–68; Matthew
Boyle, “Snap, Crackle, Pop at the Food Giants,”
BusinessWeek, October 6, 2008, p. 48.
71. Philip Lay, Todd Hewlin, and Geoffrey Moore, “In a
Downturn, Provoke Your Customers,” Harvard Business
Review, March 2009, pp. 48–56.
72. John A. Quelch and Katherine E. Jocz, “How to Market
in a Downturn,” Harvard Business Review, April 2009,
pp. 52–62.
73. Maria Bartiromo, “Facetime: Inside a Company
Resetting for Recovery,” BusinessWeek, July 13 and
20, 2009, pp. 15–17.
74. Steve Hamm, “The New Age of Frugality,”
BusinessWeek, October 20, 2008, pp. 55–58.
75. Jane Porter and Burt Heim, “Doing Whatever Gets
Them in the Door,” BusinessWeek, June 30, 2008, p. 60.
76. Ibid.
77. David Taylor, David Nichols, Diego Kerner, and Anne
Charbonneau, “Leading Brands Out of the Recession,”
Brandgym Research Paper 2, www.brandgym.com,
September 2009.
78. Todd Wasserman, “Maverick CMOs Try Going without
TV,” Brandweek, January 24, 2009.
79. Maureen Scarpelli, “Dentists Step Up Marketing Efforts
as Patients Scrimp by Skipping Visits, Wall Street
Journal, August 11, 2009.
80. Peter J. Williamson and Ming Zeng, “Value for
Money Strategies for Recessionary Times,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2009, pp. 66–74.
81. Burt Heim, “How to Sell Luxury to Penny-Pinchers,”
BusinessWeek, November 10, 2008, p. 60.
82. Stuart Elliott, “Trying to Pitch Products to the Savers,”
New York Times, June 3, 2009.
83. Andrew Martin, “In Tough Times, Spam Is Suddenly
Appealing,” Boston Globe, November 16, 2008.

Chapter 12
1. John Frank, “Beep! Beep! Coming Through,” Marketing
News, September 30, 2009, pp. 12-14; David Kiley,
“Ford’s Savior?” BusinessWeek, March 16, 2009,
pp. 31–34; Alex Taylor III, “Fixing Up Ford,” Fortune,
May 25, 2009, pp. 45–50; David Kiley, “One Ford for
the Whole Wide World,” BusinessWeek, June 15, 2009,
pp. 58–59; “Ford’s European Arm Lends a Hand,”
Economist, March 8, 2008, pp. 72–73.
2. This discussion is adapted from a classic article:
Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Success through
Differentiation: Of Anything,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1980, pp. 83–91. The first level, core
benefit, has been added to Levitt’s discussion.
3. Harper W. Boyd Jr. and Sidney Levy, “New Dimensions
in Consumer Analysis,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1963, pp. 129–40.
4. Jim Curley, “Niagara Sheet Feeder in Full Production,”
The White Sheet: Board Converting News, August 25,
2008; Jackie Schultz, “A Sheet Plant’s Lean Journey,”
Corrugated Today, January–February 2005, pp. 42–47;
Joe Iannarelli, “Jamestown Container Thinks Outside
the Box,” Business First, October 3, 2003, p. 4.
5. For some definitions, see Peter D. Bennett, ed.,
Dictionary of Marketing Terms (Chicago: American
Marketing Association, 1995). Also see, Patrick E.
Murphy and Ben M. Enis, “Classifying Products
Strategically,” Journal of Marketing 50 (July 1986),
pp. 24–42.
6. Some of these bases are discussed in David A. Garvin,
“Competing on the Eight Dimensions of Quality,”
Harvard Business Review, November–December 1987,
pp. 101–9.
7. Marco Bertini, Elie Ofek, and Dan Ariely, “The
Impact of Add-On Features on Product Evaluations,”
Journal of Consumer Research 36 (June 2009),
pp. 17–28; Tripat Gill, “Convergent Products: What
Functionalities Add More Value to the Base,” Journal
of Marketing 72 (March 2008), pp. 46–62; Robert J.
Meyer, Sheghui Zhao, and Jin K. Han, “Biases in
Valuation vs. Usage of Innovative Product Features,”
Marketing Science 27 (November–December 2008),
pp. 1083–96.
8. Paul Kedrosky, “Simple Minds,” Business 2.0, April
2006, p. 38; Debora Viana Thompson, Rebecca W.
Hamilton, and Roland Rust, “Feature Fatigue: When
Product Capabilities Become Too Much of a Good
Thing,” Journal of Marketing Research 42 (November
2005), pp. 431–42.
9. James H. Gilmore and B. Joseph Pine, Markets of One:
Creating Customer-Unique Value through Mass
Customization, (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 2000).
10. Nikolaus Franke, Peter Keinz, Christoph J. Steger,
“Testing the Value of Customization: When Do
Customers Really Prefer Products Tailored to Their
Preferences,” Journal of Marketing 73 (September
2009), pp. 103–21.

11. Gail Edmondson, “Mercedes Gets Back up to Speed,”
BusinessWeek, November 13, 2006, pp. 46–47; Peter
Gumble, “How Dr. Z Plans to Fix Mercedes,”
CNNMoney.com. http://money.cnn.com, July 13, 2009;
Chris Shunk, “Paradox: As Quality Improves,
Mercedes-Benz Dealership Profits Decline,”
Automotive News, January 27, 2009.
12. Bernd Schmitt and Alex Simonson, Marketing
Aesthetics: The Strategic Management of Brand,
Identity, and Image (New York: Free Press, 1997).
13. Stanley Reed, “Rolls-Royce at Your Service,”
BusinessWeek, November 15, 2005, pp. 92–93; RollsRoyce, www.rolls-royce.com/civil/services/totalcare;
“Rolls-Royce Secures USD 4.1 Billion Worth Orders
During Paris Air Show,” India Defence, www.indiadefence.com, June 20, 2009; “Rolls-Royce Engine
Support,” Aviation Today, June 1, 2006.
14. For a comprehensive discussion of Cemex, see Adrian
J. Slywotzky and David J. Morrison, “Digital Innovator:
Cemex,” How Digital Is Your Business (New York:
Crown Business, 2000), pp. 78–100; see also Mohanbir
Sawhney, Robert C. Wolcott, and Inigo Arroniz, “The
12 Different Ways for Companies to Innovate,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (April 1, 2006).
15. Cliff Edwards, “Why Tech Bows to Best Buy,”
BusinessWeek, December 10, 2009; Jena McGregor,
“At Best Buy, Marketing Goes Micro,” BusinessWeek,
May 15, 2008; Matthew Boyle, “Best Buy’s Giant
Gamble,” Fortune, April 3, 2006, pp. 69–75; Geoffrey
Colvin, “Talking Shop,” Fortune, August 21, 2006, pp.
73–80; “Best Buy Turns on the Geek Appeal,” DSN
Retailing Today, February 24, 2003, p. 22.
16. This section is based on a comprehensive treatment of
product returns: James Stock, Thomas Speh, and
Herbert Shear, “Managing Product Returns for
Competitive Advantage,” MIT Sloan Management
Review (Fall 2006), pp. 57–62. See also, J. Andrew
Petersen and V. Kumar, “Can Product Returns Make
You Money?” MIT Sloan Management Review (Spring
2010), pp. 85–89.
17. Dave Blanchard, “Moving Forward in Reverse,”
Logistics Today, July 12, 2005; Kelly Shermach,
“Taming CRM in the Retail Sector,” CRM Buyer,
October 12, 2006; www.epinions.com, June 28, 2010.
18. Bruce Nussbaum, “The Power of Design,”
BusinessWeek, May 17, 2004, pp. 88–94; “Masters of
Design,” Fast Company, June 2004, pp. 61–75; Also
see, Philip Kotler, “Design: A Powerful but Neglected
Strategic Tool,” Journal of Business Strategy (Fall
1984), pp. 16–21.
19. Ravindra Chitturi, Rajagopal Raghunathan and Vijay
Mahajan, “Delight by Design: The Role of Hedonic
Versus Utilitarian Benefits,” Journal of Marketing 72
(May 2008), pp. 48–63.
20. Ulrich R. Orth and Keven Malkewitz, “Holistic Package
Design and Consumer Brand Impressions,” Journal of
Marketing 72 (May 2008), pp. 64–81; Mark Borden,
“Less Hulk, More Bruce Lee,” Fast Company, April
2007, pp. 86–91.

Endnotes

E31

21. Steve Hamm and Jay Greene, “That Computer Is So
You,” BusinessWeek, January 14, 2008, pp. 24–26;
Damon Darlin, “Design Helps H.P. Profit More on PCs,”
New York Times, May 17, 2007.
22. “IDEA Design Gallery,” www.isda.org, May 14, 2010;
“Design Winners: The List,” BusinessWeek, July 22,
2009; David Carnoy, “The 20 Most Innovative Products
of the Decade,” CNET Reviews, December 10, 2009;
Emily Lambert, “Splash,” Forbes, July 23, 2007,
pp. 66–68.
23. Virginia Postrel, The Substance of Style: How the Rise
of Aesthetic Value Is Remaking Commerce, Culture,
and Consciousness (New York: HarperCollins, 2003).
24. Linda Tischler, “Pop Artist David Butler,” Fast
Company, October 2009, pp. 91–97; Jessie Scanlon,
“Coca-Cola’s New Design Direction,” BusinessWeek,
August 25, 2008.
25. Todd Wasserman, “Thinking by Design,” Brandweek,
November 3, 2008, pp. 18–21.
26. Jay Green, “Where Designers Rule,” BusinessWeek,
November 5, 2007, pp. 46–51; Deborah Steinborn,
“Talking About Design,” Wall Street Journal, June 23,
2008, p. R6.
27. In reality, Tide’s product line is actually deeper and
more complex. There are 9 powder products, 16 liquid
products, 1 Stain Release product, 1 Tide to Go
product, 1 Tide Washing Machine Cleaner, and 9 Tide
accessories.
28. A Yesim Orhun, “Optimal Product Line Design When
Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences,”
Marketing Science 28 (September–October 2009), pp.
868–86; Robert Bordley, “Determining the Appropriate
Depth and Breadth of a Firm’s Product Portfolio,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (February 2003),
pp. 39–53; Peter Boatwright and Joseph C. Nunes,
“Reducing Assortment: An Attribute-Based Approach,”
Journal of Marketing 65 (July 2001), pp. 50–63.
29. Adapted from a Hamilton Consultants White Paper,
December 1, 2000.
30. This illustration is found in Benson P. Shapiro, Industrial
Product Policy: Managing the Existing Product Line
(Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 1977),
pp. 3–5, 98–101.
31. Amna Kirmani, Sanjay Sood, and Sheri Bridges, “The
Ownership Effect in Consumer Responses to BrandLine Stretches,” Journal of Marketing 63 (January
1999), pp. 88–101; T. Randall, K. Ulrich, and D.
Reibstein, “Brand Equity and Vertical Product-Line
Extent,” Marketing Science 17 (Fall 1998), pp. 356–79;
David A. Aaker, “Should You Take Your Brand to Where
the Action Is?” Harvard Business Review,
September–October 1997, pp. 135–43.
32. Michael Carolan, “InterContinental Hotels Sales Up
After 18 Months of Falls,” Wall Street Journal, May 11,
2010; Barbara De Lollis, “Holiday Inn Chain Upgrades
With Style,” USA TODAY, June 24, 2008; Bob Garfield,
“What Makes This Commercial Great? The Bacon Bit
Says It All,” Advertising Age, February 25, 2008.

E32

Endnotes

33. Alex Taylor III, “Bavaria’s Next Top Model,” Fortune,
March 30, 2009, pp. 100–3; Neal E. Boudette, “BMW’s
Push to Broaden Line Hits Some Bumps in the Road,”
Wall Street Journal, January 25, 2005; Alex Taylor III,
“The Ultimate Fairly Inexpensive Driving Machine,”
Fortune, November 1, 2004, pp. 130–40.
34. Steuart Henderson Britt, “How Weber’s Law Can Be
Applied to Marketing,” Business Horizons, February
1975, pp. 21–29.
35. Brett R. Gordon, “A Dynamic Model of Consumer
Replacement Cycles in the PC Processor Industry,”
Marketing Science 28 (September–October 2009),
pp. 846–67; Raghunath Singh Rao, Om Narasimhan,
and George John, “Understanding the Role of Trade-Ins
in Durable Goods Markets: Theory and Evidence,”
Marketing Science 28 (September–October 2009),
pp. 950–67.
36. Stanley Holmes, “All the Rage Since Reagan,”
BusinessWeek, July 25, 2005, p. 68.
37. Nirmalya Kumar, “Kill a Brand, Keep a Customer,”
Harvard Business Review, December 2003, pp. 86–95;
Brad Stone, “Back to Basics,” Newsweek, August 4,
2003, pp. 42–44; Sarah Skidmore, “Designers, Makers
Tune In to Collectors for New Trends,” Associated Press,
January 21, 2007.
38. Laurens M. Sloot, Dennis Fok, and Peter Verhoef,
“The Short- and Long-Term Impact of an Assortment
Reduction on Category Sales,” Journal of Marketing
Research 43 (November 2006), pp. 536–48.
39. Patricia O’Connell, “A Chat with Unilever’s Niall
FitzGerald,” BusinessWeek, www.businessweek.com,
August 2, 2001; John Willman, “Leaner, Cleaner, and
Healthier Is the Stated Aim,” Financial Times, February
23, 2000; “Unilever’s Goal: ‘Power Brands’,”
Advertising Age, January 3, 2000.
40. “Volkswagen Brand Turnaround Drives Q1 Group
Profits,” Reuters, April 29, 2010; Andreas Cremer, “VW in
‘Last Attempt’ to Save Seat Amid Spanish Crisis,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, www.businessweek.com,
May 14, 2010; George Rädler, Jan Kubes, and Bohdan
Wojnar, “Skoda Auto: From ‘No-Class’ to World-Class in
One Decade,” Critical EYE 15 (July 2006); Scott D.
Upham, “Beneath the Brand,” Automotive Manufacturing
& Production, June 2001.
41. Eric T. Anderson and Duncan I. Simester, “Does
Demand Fall When Customers Perceive That Prices Are
Unfair? The Case of Premium Pricing for Large Sizes,”
Marketing Science 27 (May–June 2008), pp. 492–500.
42. Ricard Gil and Wesley R. Hartmann, “Empirical
Analysis of Metering Price Discrimination: Evidence
from Concession Sales at Movie Theaters,” Marketing
Science 28 (November–December 2009), pp. 1046–62.
43. Connie Guglielmo, “Hewlett-Packard Says Printer
Business is ‘Healthy,’” Bloomberg News, December
22, 2009; “HP Annual Report 2008,” HP,
www.hp.com/hpinfo/investor/; Ben Elgin, “Can HP’s
Printer Biz Keep Printing Money?” BusinessWeek,
July 14, 2003, pp. 68–70; Simon Avery, “H-P Sees

Room for Growth in Printer Market,” Wall Street
Journal, June 28, 2001.
44. Dilip Soman and John T. Gourville, “Transaction
Decoupling: How Price Bundling Affects the Decision to
Consume,” Journal of Marketing Research 38 (February
2001), pp. 30–44; Ramanathan Subramaniam and R.
Venkatesh, “Optimal Bundling Strategies in Multiobject
Auctions of Complements or Substitutes,” Marketing
Science 28 (March–April 2009), pp. 264–73.
45. Anita Elberse, Bye-Bye Bundles: The Unbundling of
Music in Digital Channels,” Journal of Marketing 74
(May 2010), pp. 107–23.
46. Akshay R. Rao, Lu Qu, and Robert W. Ruekert,
“Signaling Unobservable Quality through a Brand Ally,”
Journal of Marketing Research 36 (May 1999),
pp. 258–68; Akshay R. Rao and Robert W. Ruekert,
“Brand Alliances as Signals of Product Quality,” Sloan
Management Review (Fall 1994), pp. 87–97.
47. Bernard L. Simonin and Julie A. Ruth, “Is a Company
Known by the Company It Keeps? Assessing the
Spillover Effects of Brand Alliances on Consumer
Brand Attitudes,” Journal of Marketing Research 35
(February 1998), pp. 30–42; see also, C. W. Park, S. Y.
Jun, and A. D. Shocker, “Composite Branding
Alliances: An Investigation of Extension and Feedback
Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 33 (November
1996), pp. 453–66.
48. Tansev Geylani, J. Jeffrey Inman, and Frenkel Ter
Hofstede, “Image Reinforcement or Impairment: The
Effects of Co-Branding on Attribute Uncertainty,”
Marketing Science 27 (July–August 2008), pp. 730–44;
Ed Lebar, Phil Buehler, Kevin Lane Keller, Monika
Sawicka, Zeynep Aksehirli, and Keith Richey, “Brand
Equity Implications of Joint Branding Programs,”
Journal of Advertising Research 45 (December 2005).
49. C. W. Park, S. Y. Jun, and A. D. Shocker, “Composite
Branding Alliances: An Investigation of Extension and
Feedback Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 33
(November 1996), pp. 453–66.; Lance Leuthesser,
Chiranjier Kohli, and Rajneesh Suri, “2 + 2 = 5? A
Framework for Using Co-Branding to Leverage a
Brand,” Journal of Brand Management 2 (September
2003), pp. 35–47.
50. Based in part on a talk by Nancy Bailey, “Using
Licensing to Build the Brand,” Brand Masters
Conference, December 7, 2000.
51. Philip Kotler and Waldermar Pfoertsch, Ingredient
Branding: Making the Invisible Visible, (Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2011).
52. Kalpesh Kaushik Desai and Kevin Lane Keller, “The
Effects of Brand Expansions and Ingredient Branding
Strategies on Host Brand Extendibility,” Journal of
Marketing 66 (January 2002), pp. 73–93; D. C.
Denison, “Ingredient Branding Puts Big Names in the
Mix,” Boston Globe, May 26, 2002.
53. Joe Tradii, “Ingredient Branding: Time to Check That
Recipe Again,” Brandweek, March 29, 2010, p. 44; Piet
Levy, “B-to-B-to-C,” Marketing News, September 30,
2009, pp. 15–20.

54. “DuPont Receives Corporate Innovation Award,”
DuPont, www.dupont.com, November 13, 2009.
55. Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 3rd ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008); Philip
Kotler and Waldemar Pfoertsch, B2B Brand Management
(New York: Springer, 2006); Paul F. Nunes, Stephen F.
Dull, and Patrick D. Lynch, “When Two Brands Are Better
Than One,” Outlook, January 2003, pp. 14–23.
56. Fred Richards, “Memo to CMOs: It’s The Packaging,
Stupid,” Brandweek, August 17, 2009, p. 22.
57. Susan B. Bassin, “Value-Added Packaging Cuts through
Store Clutter,” Marketing News, September 26, 1988,
p. 21. Reprinted with permission from Marketing News,
published by the American Marketing Association.
58. Stuart Elliott, “Tropicana Discovers Some Buyers Are
Passionate About Packaging,” New York Times,
February 23, 2009; Linda Tischler, “Never Mind! Pepsi
Pulls Much-Loathed Tropicana Packaging,” Fast
Company, February 23, 2009; Natalie Zmuda,
“Tropicana Line’s Sales Plunge 20% PostRebranding,” Advertising Age, April 2, 2009; Kenneth
Hein, “Tropicana Squeezes Out Fresh Design with a
Peel,” Brandweek, January 19, 2009, p. 30.
59. Mya Frazier, “How Can Your Package Stand Out? Eye
Tracking Looks Hard for Answers,” Advertising Age,
October 16, 2006, p. 14.
60. Kate Fitzgerald, “Packaging Is the Capper,” Advertising
Age, May 5, 2003, p. 22.
61. John C. Kozup, Elizabeth H. Creyer, and Scot Burton,
“Making Healthful Food Choices: The Influence of
Health Claims and Nutrition Information on
Consumers’ Evaluations of Packaged Food Products
and Restaurant Menu Items,” Journal of Marketing 67
(April 2003), pp. 19–34; Siva K. Balasubramanian and
Catherine Cole, “Consumers’ Search and Use of
Nutrition Information: The Challenge and Promise of
the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act,” Journal of
Marketing 66 (July 2002), pp. 112–27.
62. Robert Berner, “Watch Out, Best Buy and Circuit City,”
BusinessWeek, November 21, 2005, pp. 46–48.
63. Tao Chen, Ajay Kalra, and Baohung Sun, “Why Do
Consumers Buy Extended Service Contracts,” Journal of
Consumer Research 36 (December 2009), pp. 611–23.
64. Chris Serres, “More Electronics Buyers Skip Extended
Warranties,” Minneapolis Star Tribune, July 14, 2007.
For an empirical study, see Junhong Chu and Pradeep
K. Chintagunta, “Quantifying the Economic Value of
Warranties in the U.S. Server Market, Marketing
Science 28 (January–February 2009), pp. 99–121.
65. Barbara Ettore, “Phenomenal Promises Mean
Business,” Management Review (March 1994),
pp. 18–23; “More Firms Pledge Guaranteed Service,”
Wall Street Journal, July 17, 1991; also see, Sridhar
Moorthy and Kannan Srinivasan, “Signaling Quality
with a Money-Back Guarantee: The Role of
Transaction Costs,” Marketing Science 14 (Fall 1995),
pp. 442–46; Christopher W. L. Hart, Extraordinary
Guarantees (New York: AMACOM, 1993).
Endnotes

E33

Chapter 13
1. Leonard L. Berry, On Great Service: A Framework for
Action (New York: Free Press, 2006); Leonard L. Berry,
Discovering the Soul of Service: The Nine Drivers of
Sustainable Business Success (New York: Free Press,
1999); Fred Wiersema, ed., Customer Service:
Extraordinary Results at Southwest Airlines, Charles
Schwab, Lands’ End, American Express, Staples, and
USAA (New York: HarperBusiness, 1998).
2. Matt Krantz, “Tinseltown Gets Glitzy New Star,” USA
TODAY, August 24, 2009; Linda Tischler, “Join the
Circus,” Fast Company, July 2005, 53–58; “Cirque du
Soleil,” America’s Greatest Brands 3 (2004); Geoff
Keighley, “The Factory,” Business 2.0, February 2004,
p. 102; Robin D. Rusch, “Cirque du Soleil
Phantasmagoria Contorts,” Brandchannel.com,
(December 1, 2003).
3. United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics. www.bls.gov/emp/home.htm.
4. Benjamin Scheider and David E. Bowen, Winning the
Service Game (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1995); Leonard L. Berry, “Services Marketing Is
Different,” Business, May–June 1980, pp. 24–30. For a
thorough review of academic research into services,
see Roland T. Rust and Tuck Siong Chung, “Marketing
Models of Service and Relationships,” Marketing
Science 25 (November–December 2006), pp. 560–80.
5. Paul Keegan, “The Best New Idea in Business,”
Fortune, September 14, 2009, pp. 42–52; Adam
Ashton, “Growth Galore but Profits Are Zip,”
BusinessWeek, September 8, 2008, p. 62; Alex
Frankel, “Zipcar Makes the Leap,” Fast Company,
March 2008, pp. 48–50; Mike Beirne, “Temporary
Plates,” Brandweek, July 9, 2007, pp. 30–34.
6. Further classifications of services are described in
Christopher H. Lovelock, Services Marketing, 3rd ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996). Also see
John E. Bateson, Managing Services Marketing: Text
and Readings, 3rd ed. (Hinsdale, IL: Dryden, 1995).
7. Valarie A. Zeithaml, “How Consumer Evaluation
Processes Differ between Goods and Services,”
J. Donnelly and W. R. George, eds., Marketing of
Services (Chicago: American Marketing Association,
1981), pp. 186–90.
8. Amy Ostrom and Dawn Iacobucci, “Consumer
Trade-Offs and the Evaluation of Services,” Journal of
Marketing 59 (January 1995), pp. 17–28.
9. For discussion of how the blurring of the line
distinguishing products and services changes the
meaning of this taxonomy, see Christopher Lovelock
and Evert Gummesson, “Whither Services Marketing?
In Search of a New Paradigm and Fresh Perspectives,”
Journal of Service Research 7 (August 2004), pp.
20–41; and Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch,
“Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing,”
Journal of Marketing 68 (January 2004), pp. 1–17.
10. Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Intangible Products and
Product Intangibles,” Harvard Business Review,

E34

Endnotes

May–June 1981, pp. 94–102; Leonard L. Berry,
“Services Marketing Is Different,” Business, May–June,
1980, pp. 24–29.
11. B. H. Booms and M. J. Bitner, “Marketing Strategies
and Organizational Structures for Service Firms,” J.
Donnelly and W. R. George, eds., Marketing of
Services (Chicago: American Marketing Association,
1981), pp. 47–51.
12. Lewis P. Carbone and Stephan H. Haeckel,
“Engineering Customer Experiences,” Marketing
Management 3 (Winter 1994), p. 17.
13. Bernd H. Schmitt, Customer Experience Management
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003); Bernd H.
Schmitt, David L. Rogers, and Karen Vrotsos (2003),
There’s No Business That’s Not Show Business:
Marketing in an Experience Culture (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall Financial Times, 2004).
14. Chip Heath and Dan Heath, “Give ’Em Something to
Talk About,” Fast Company, June 2007, pp. 58–59.
15. For some emerging research results on the effects of
creating time and place service separation, see Hean
Tat Keh and Jun Pang, “Customer Reaction to Service
Separation,” Journal of Marketing 74 (March 2010),
pp. 55–70.
16. Gila E. Fruchter and Eitan Gerstner, “Selling with
‘Satisfaction Guaranteed,’” Journal of Service
Research 1 (May 1999), pp. 313–23. See also,
Rebecca J. Slotegraaf and J. Jeffrey Inman,
“Longitudinal Shifts in the Drivers of Satisfaction with
Product Quality: The Role of Attribute Resolvability,”
Journal of Marketing Research 41 (August 2004),
pp. 269–80.
17. For a similar list, see Leonard L. Berry and A.
Parasuraman, Marketing Services: Competing through
Quality (New York: Free Press, 1991), p. 16.
18. G. Pascal Zachary and Dick Kovacevich, “Bank
Different,” Business 2.0, June 2006, pp. 101–3; Greg
Farrell, “Banking on Success as a One-Stop Shop,”
USA Today, March 26, 2007.
19. The material in this paragraph is based in part on
Valarie Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and Dwayne D.
Gremler, “Service Development and Design,” Services
Marketing: Integrating Customer Focus across the
Firm, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), Chapter 9.
20. G. Lynn Shostack, “Service Positioning through
Structural Change,” Journal of Marketing 51 (January
1987), pp. 34–43.
21. Vikas Mittal, Wagner A. Kamakura, and Rahul Govind,
“Geographical Patterns in Customer Service and
Satisfaction: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of
Marketing 68 (July 2004), pp. 48–62.
22. Jeffrey F. Rayport, Bernard J. Jaworski, and Ellie
J. Kyung, “Best Face Forward: Improving Companies’
Service Interface with Customers,” Journal of
Interactive Marketing 19 (Autumn 2005), pp. 67–80;
Asim Ansari and Carl F. Mela, “E-Customization,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (May 2003),
pp. 131–45.

23. W. Earl Sasser, “Match Supply and Demand in
Service Industries,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1976, pp. 133–40.
24. Steven M. Shugan and Jinhong Xie, “Advance Selling
for Services,” California Management Review 46
(Spring 2004), pp. 37–54; Eyal Biyalogorsky and
Eitan Gerstner, “Contingent Pricing to Reduce
Price Risks,” Marketing Science 23 (Winter 2004),
pp. 146–55; Steven M. Shugan and Jinhong Xie,
“Advance Pricing of Services and Other Implications
of Separating Purchase and Consumption,” Journal
of Service Research 2 (February 2000),
pp. 227–39.
25. Seth Godin, “If It’s Broke, Fix It,” Fast Company,
October 2003, p. 131.
26. James Wallace, “Singapore Airlines Raises the Bar for
Luxury Flying, Seattle Post Intelligencer, January 18,
2007; Justin Doebele, “The Engineer,” Forbes, January
9, 2006, pp. 122–24; Stanley Holmes, “Creature
Comforts at 30,000 Feet,” BusinessWeek, December
18, 2006, p. 138; Anonymous, “What Makes Singapore
a Service Champion?” Strategic Direction, April 2003,
pp. 26–28; www.singaporeaire.com.
27. Diane Brady, “Why Service Stinks,” BusinessWeek,
October 23, 2000, pp. 119–28.
28. Mary Clingman, “Turkey Talker,” Fortune, November
27, 2006, p. 70.
29. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Happy Endings Lead to Happy
Returns,” Marketing News, October 30, 2009, p. 20.
30. Dan Reed, “United Makeover Aims to Refresh
and Renew,” USA Today, September 17, 2009,
pp. 1B–2B; Elisabeth Sullivan, “Happy Endings Lead
to Happy Returns,” Marketing News, October 30,
2009, p. 20.
31. Nikki Hopewell, “Moyer Is Committed to Delivering a
Comcastic Experience,” Marketing News, October 15,
2008, pp. 28–30; Hannah Clark, “Customer Service
Hell,” Forbes, March 30, 2006.
32. David Lazarus, “JetBlue Response Praised,” San
Francisco Chronicle, February 25, 2007, B1; Marc
Gunther, “Nothing Blue About This Airline,” Fortune,
September 14, 2009, pp. 114–18.
33. Stephen S. Tax, Mark Colgate, and David Bowen,
“How to Prevent Your Customers from Failing,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (Spring 2006), pp. 30–38;
Mei Xue and Patrick T. Harker, “Customer Efficiency:
Concept and Its Impact on E-Business Management,”
Journal of Service Research 4 (May 2002),
pp. 253–67; Matthew L. Meuter, Amy L. Ostrom,
Robert I. Roundtree, and Mary Jo Bitner, “Self-Service
Technologies: Understanding Customer Satisfaction
with Technology-Based Service Encounters,” Journal
of Marketing 64 (July 2000), pp. 50–64.
34. Kimmy Wa Chan, Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim, and Simon
S. K. Lam, “Is Customer Participation in Value Creation
a Double-Edged Sword? Evidence from Professional
Financial Services Across Cultures,” Journal of
Marketing 74 (May 2010), pp. 48–64.

35. Valarie Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and Dwayne
D. Gremler, Services Marketing: Integrating Customer
Focus across the Firm, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2006).
36. Stephen S. Tax, Mark Colgate, and David Bowen,
“How to Prevent Your Customers from Failing,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (Spring 2006), pp. 30–38;
Michael Sanserino and Cari Tuna, “Companies Strive
Harder to Please Customers,” Wall Street Journal,
July 27, 2009, p. B4.
37. James L. Heskett, W, Earl Sasser Jr., and Joe Wheeler,
Ownership Quotient: Putting the Service Profit Chain to
Work for Unbeatable Competitive Advantage (Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2008).
38. D. Todd Donovan, Tom J. Brown, and John C. Mowen,
“Internal Benefits of Service Worker Customer
Orientation: Job Satisfaction, Commitment, and
Organizational Citizenship Behaviors,” Journal of
Marketing 68 (January 2004), pp. 128–46.
39. Dan Heath and Chip Heath, “I Love You. Now What?”
Fast Company, October 2008, pp. 95–96.
40. Evan Hessel, “Kung Pao Chicken for the Soul,” Forbes,
April 21, 2008, pp. 106–107.
41. Frances X. Frei, “The Four Things a Service Business
Must Get Right,” Harvard Business Review, April 2008,
pp. 70–80.
42. Christian Gronroos, “A Service-Quality Model and Its
Marketing Implications,” European Journal of
Marketing 18 (1984), pp. 36–44.
43. Leonard Berry, “Big Ideas in Services Marketing,”
Journal of Consumer Marketing (Spring 1986),
pp. 47–51. See also, Jagdip Singh, “Performance
Productivity and Quality of Frontline Employees in
Service Organizations,” Journal of Marketing 64 (April
2000), pp. 15–34; Detelina Marinova, Jun Ye, and
Jagdip Singh, “Do Frontline Mechanisms Matter?
Impact of Quality and Productivity Orientations on Unit
Revenue, Efficiency, and Customer Satisfaction,”
Journal of Marketing 72 (March 2008), pp. 28–45; John
R. Hauser, Duncan I. Simester, and Birger Wernerfelt,
“Internal Customers and Internal Suppliers,” Journal of
Marketing Research 33 (August 1996), pp. 268–80;
Walter E. Greene, Gary D. Walls, and Larry J. Schrest,
“Internal Marketing: The Key to External Marketing
Success,” Journal of Services Marketing 8 (1994),
pp. 5–13.
44. Christian Gronroos, “A Service-Quality Model and Its
Marketing Implications,” European Journal of
Marketing 18 (1984), pp. 36–44; Michael D. Hartline,
James G. Maxham III, and Daryl O. McKee, “Corridors
of Influence in the Dissemination of CustomerOriented Strategy to Customer-Contact Service
Employees,”Journal of Marketing 64 (April 2000),
pp. 35–50.
45. John Batelle, “Charles Schwab, Back from the Brink,”
Business 2.0, March 2006; “Q&A with Becky Saeger,
CMO, Charles Schwab,” ANA Marketing Musings,
September 11, 2006; Betsy Morris, “Charles Schwab’s

Endnotes

E35

Big Challenge,” Fortune, May 30, 2005; Rob Markey,
Fred Reichheld, and Andreas Dullweber, “Closing the
Customer Feedback Loop,” Harvard Business Review,
December 2009, pp. 43–47.
46. Ad de Jong, Ko de Ruyter, and Jos Lemmink,
“Antecedents and Consequences of the Service
Climate in Boundary-Spanning Self-Managing Service
Teams,” Journal of Marketing 68 (April 2004), pp. 18–35;
Michael D. Hartline and O. C. Ferrell, “The Management
of Customer-Contact Service Employees: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Marketing 60 (October 1996),
pp. 52–70; Christian Homburg, Jan Wieseke, and
Torsten Bornemann, “Implementing the Marketing
Concept at the Employee-Customer Interface: The
Role of Customer Need Knowledge,” Journal of
Marketing 73 (July 2009), pp. 64–81; Chi Kin (Bennett)
Yim, David K. Tse, and Kimmy Wa Chan,
“Strengthening Customer Loyalty through Intimacy and
Passion: Roles of Customer-Firm Affection and
Customer-Staff Relationships, Journal of Marketing
Research 45 (December 2008), pp. 741–56.
47. Michael Sanserino and Cari Tuna, “Companies Strive
Harder to Please Customers,” Wall Street Journal, July
27, 2009, p. B4.
48. Jena McGregor, “When Service Means Survival,”
BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, pp. 26–30.
49. Heather Green, “How Amazon Aims to Keep You
Clicking,” BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, pp. 34–40.
50. Roland T. Rust and Katherine N. Lemon, “E-Service
and the Consumer,” International Journal of Electronic
Commerce 5 (Spring 2001), pp. 83–99. See also,
Balaji Padmanabhan and Alexander Tuzhilin, “On the
Use of Optimization for Data Mining: Theoretical
Interactions and ECRM opportunities,” Management
Science 49 (October 2003), pp. 1327–43; B. P. S.
Murthi and Sumit Sarkar, “The Role of the
Management Sciences in Research on
Personalization,” Management Science 49
(October 2003), pp. 1344–62.
51. Roland T. Rust, P. K. Kannan, and Na Peng, “The
Customer Economics of Internet Privacy,” Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 30 (2002),
pp. 455–64.
52. Jena McGregor, “Customer Service Champs,”
BusinessWeek, March 5, 2007, pp. 52–64.
53. Jena McGregor, “When Service Means Survival,”
BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, pp. 26–30.
54. John A. Martilla and John C. James, “ImportancePerformance Analysis,” Journal of Marketing 41
(January 1977), pp. 77–79.
55. Dave Dougherty and Ajay Murthy, “What Service
Customers Really Want,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2009, p. 22; for a contrarian point of view,
see Edward Kasabov, “The Compliant Customer,” MIT
Sloan Management Review (Spring 2010), pp. 18–19.
56. Jeffrey G. Blodgett and Ronald D. Anderson, “A
Bayesian Network Model of the Customer Complaint
Process,” Journal of Service Research 2 (May 2000),
pp. 321–38; Stephen S. Tax and Stephen
E36

Endnotes

W. Brown, “Recovering and Learning from Service
Failures,” Sloan Management Review (Fall 1998),
pp. 75–88; Claes Fornell and Birger Wernerfelt, “A
Model for Customer Complaint Management,”
Marketing Science 7 (Summer 1988), pp. 271–86.
57. James G. Maxham III and Richard G. Netemeyer,
“Firms Reap What They Sow: The Effects of Shared
Values and Perceived Organizational Justice on
Customers’ Evaluations of Complaint Handling,”
Journal of Marketing 67 (January 2003), pp. 46–62;
Jagdip Singh, “Performance Productivity and Quality of
Frontline Employees in Service Organizations,” Journal
of Marketing 64 (April 2000), pp. 15–34; Barry J. Rabin
and James S. Boles, “Employee Behavior in a Service
Environment: A Model and Test of Potential Differences
between Men and Women,” Journal of Marketing 62
(April 1998), pp. 77–91.
58. Stephen S. Tax, Stephen W. Brown and Murali
Chandrashekaran, “Customer Evaluations of Service
Complaint Experiences: Implications for Relationship
Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 62 (April 1998),
pp. 60–76; Stephen S. Tax and Stephen W. Brown,
“Recovering and Learning from Service Failures,”
Sloan Management Review (Fall 1998), pp. 75–88.
59. Amy Barrett, “Vanguard Gets Personal,” BusinessWeek,
October 3, 2005, pp. 115–18; Carolyn Marconi and
Donna MacFarland, “Growth by Marketing under the
Radar,” Presentation made at Marketing Science
Institute Board of Trustees Meeting: Pathways to
Growth, Tucson, AZ, November 7, 2002.
60. www.schneider.com; www.informs.org; Todd Raphael,
“Facing ‘Fierce Competition,’ Schneider National
Struggles to Fill Trucking Jobs,” Inside Recruiting, May
31, 2006.
61. Roger Yu, “Sheraton Has Designs on Fresh Look,”
USA TODAY, August 26, 2008, p. 4B.
62. Robert Levine, “Globe Trotter,” Fast Company,
September 2008, pp. 73–74; Andrew McMains, “Q&A:
Kayak’s Robert Birge,” Adweek.com, June 2, 2009;
Peter West, “Retail Medical Clinics Offer Quality Care:
Study,” HealthDay, August 31, 2009; “More Medical
Clinics Opening in Retail Stores,” Associated Press,
February 2, 2006; Ellen McGirt, “Fast Food Medicine,”
Fast Company, September 2007, pp. 37–38; “Kenny
Dichter: A Big Idea Takes Off,” Special Advertising
Supplement, CIT Behind the Business, Condé Nast
Portfolio, September 2007.
63. Jessi Hempel, “Salesforce Hits Its Stride,” Fortune,
March 2, 2009, pp. 29–32.
64. Jena McGregor, “USAA’s Battle Plan,” Bloomberg
BusinessWeek, March 1, 2010, pp. 40–43; Jena
McGregor, “When Service Means Survival,”
BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, pp. 26–30; “Customer
Service Champs,” BusinessWeek, March 5, 2007;
“USAA Receives Chairman’s Award,” San Antonio
Business Journal, June 20, 2002.
65. Susan M. Keaveney, “Customer Switching Behavior in
Service Industries: An Exploratory Study,” Journal of
Marketing 59 (April 1995), pp. 71–82. See also,

Jaishankar Ganesh, Mark J. Arnold, and Kristy E.
Reynolds, “Understanding the Customer Base of
Service Providers: An Examination of the Differences
between Switchers and Stayers,” Journal of Marketing
64 (July 2000), pp. 65–87; Michael D. Hartline and O. C.
Ferrell, “The Management of Customer-Contact Service
Employees: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of
Marketing 60 (October 1996), pp. 52–70; Linda L. Price,
Eric J. Arnould, and Patrick Tierney, “Going to Extremes:
Managing Service Encounters and Assessing Provider
Performance,” Journal of Marketing 59 (April 1995),
pp. 83–97; Lois A. Mohr, Mary Jo Bitner, and Bernard H.
Booms, “Critical Service Encounters: The Employee’s
Viewpoint,” Journal of Marketing 58 (October 1994),
pp. 95–106.
66. Dave Dougherty and Ajay Murthy, “What Service
Customers Really Want,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2009, p. 22.
67. Glenn B. Voss, A. Parasuraman, and Dhruv Grewal,
“The Role of Price, Performance, and Expectations in
Determining Satisfaction in Service Exchanges,”
Journal of Marketing 62 (October 1998), pp. 46–61.
68. Roland T. Rust and Richard L. Oliver, “Should We
Delight the Customer?” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 28 (December 2000), pp. 86–94.
69. A. Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L.
Berry, “A Conceptual Model of Service Quality and Its
Implications for Future Research,” Journal of
Marketing 49 (Fall 1985), pp. 41–50. See also, Michael
K. Brady and J. Joseph Cronin Jr., “Some New
Thoughts on Conceptualizing Perceived Service
Quality,” Journal of Marketing 65 (July 2001), pp.
34–49; Susan J. Devlin and H. K. Dong, “Service
Quality from the Customers’ Perspective,” Marketing
Research (Winter 1994), pp. 4–13.
70. Leonard L. Berry and A. Parasuraman, Marketing
Services: Competing through Quality (New York: Free
Press, 1991), p. 16.
71. A. Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L.
Berry, “A Conceptual Model of Service Quality and Its
Implications for Future Research,” Journal of Marketing
49 (Fall 1985), pp. 41–50.
72. William Boulding, Ajay Kalra, Richard Staelin, and
Valarie A. Zeithaml, “A Dynamic Model of Service
Quality: From Expectations to Behavioral Intentions,”
Journal of Marketing Research 30 (February 1993),
pp. 7–27.
73. Roland T. Rust and Tuck Siong Chung, “Marketing
Models of Service and Relationships,” Marketing
Science 25 (November–December 2006), pp. 560–80;
Katherine N. Lemon, Tiffany Barnett White, and Russell
S. Winer, “Dynamic Customer Relationship
Management: Incorporating Future Considerations into
the Service Retention Decision,” Journal of Marketing
66 (January 2002), pp. 1–14; Ruth N. Bolton and
Katherine N. Lemon, “A Dynamic Model of Customers’
Usage of Services: Usage as an Antecedent and
Consequence of Satisfaction,” Journal of Marketing
Research 36 (May 1999), pp. 171–86.

74. Kent Grayson and Tim Ambler, “The Dark Side of
Long-Term Relationships in Marketing Services,”
Journal of Marketing Research 36 (February 1999),
pp. 132–41.
75. Leonard L. Berry, Kathleen Seiders, and Dhruv Grewal,
“Understanding Service Convenience,” Journal of
Marketing 66 (July 2002), pp. 1–17.
76. “Help Yourself,” Economist, July 2, 2009, pp. 62–63.
77. Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski, Best Face
Forward (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2005); Jeffrey F. Rayport, Bernard J. Jaworski, and Ellie
J. Kyung, “Best Face Forward,” Journal of Interactive
Marketing 19 (Autumn 2005), pp. 67–80; Jeffrey
F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski, “Best Face
Forward,” Harvard Business Review, December 2004,
pp. 47–58.
78. Matthew L. Meuter, Mary Jo Bitner, Amy L. Ostrom,
and Stephen W. Brown, “Choosing among Alternative
Service Delivery Modes: An Investigation of Customer
Trial of Self-Service Technologies,” Journal of
Marketing 69 (April 2005), pp. 61–83.
79. Eric Fang, Robert W. Palmatier, and Jan-Benedict
E. M. Steenkamp, “Effect of Service Transition
Strategies on Firm Value,” Journal of Marketing 72
(September 2008), pp. 1–14.
80. Mark Vandenbosch and Niraj Dawar, “Beyond
Better Products: Capturing Value in Customer
Interactions,” MIT Sloan Management Review 43
(Summer 2002), pp. 35–42; Milind M. Lele and
Uday S. Karmarkar, “Good Product Support Is
Smart Marketing,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1983, pp. 124–32.
81. For research on the effects of delays in service on
service evaluations, see Michael K. Hui and David
K. Tse, “What to Tell Consumers in Waits of Different
Lengths: An Integrative Model of Service Evaluation,”
Journal of Marketing 60 (April 1996), pp. 81–90; Shirley
Taylor, “Waiting for Service: The Relationship between
Delays and Evaluations of Service,” Journal of
Marketing 58 (April 1994), pp. 56–69.
82. Byron G. Auguste, Eric P. Harmon, and Vivek Pandit,
“The Right Service Strategies for Product Companies,”
McKinsey Quarterly 1 (2006), pp. 41–51.
83. Goutam Challagalla, R. Venkatesh, and Ajay K. Kohli,
“Proactive Postsales Service: When and Why Does it
Pay Off?” Journal of Marketing 73 (March 2009),
pp. 70–87.

Chapter 14
1. Brian Burnsed, “Where Discounting Can Be
Dangerous,” BusinessWeek, August 3, 2009, p. 49;
“Tiffany’s Profit Tops Expectations,” Associated
Press, November 26, 2009; Cintra Wilson, “If Bling
Had a Hall of Fame,” New York Times, July 30, 2009;
Ellen Byron, “Fashion Victim: To Refurbish Its Image,
Tiffany Risks Profits,” Wall Street Journal, January 10,
2007, p. A1.
2. “The Price Is Wrong,” Economist, May 25, 2002.
Endnotes

E37

3. Xavier Dreze and Joseph C. Nunes, “Using CombinedCurrency Prices to Lower Consumers’ Perceived
Cost,” Journal of Marketing Research 41 (February
2004), pp. 59–72; Raghuram Iyengar, Kamel Jedidi,
and Rajeev Kohli, “A Conjoint Approach to Multipart
Pricing,” Journal of Marketing Research 45 (April 2008),
pp. 195–201; Marco Bertini and Luc Wathieu,
“Attention Arousal Through Price Partitioning,”
Marketing Science 27 (March/April 2008), pp. 236–46.
4. Rick Newman, “The Great Retail Revolution,” U.S.
News & World Report, March 2010, pp. 19–20; Philip
Moeller, “Tough Times Are Molding Tough Consumers,”
U.S. News & World Report, March 2010, pp. 22–25;
Steve Hamm, “The New Age of Frugality,”
BusinessWeek, October 20, 2008, pp. 55–60; Timothy
W. Martin, “Frugal Shoppers Drive Grocers Back to
Basics,” Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2009, p. B1;
Daniel Gross, “The Latte Era Grinds Down,”
Newsweek, October 22, 2007, pp. 46–47.
5. Paul Markillie, “A Perfect Market: A Survey of ECommerce,” Economist, May 15, 2004, pp. 3–20;
David Kirpatrick, “How the Open-Source World Plans
to Smack Down Microsoft, and Oracle, and . . . ,”
Fortune, February 23, 2004, pp. 92–100; Faith
Keenan, “The Price Is Really Right,” BusinessWeek,
March 31, 2003, pp. 61–67; Michael Menduno,
“Priced to Perfection,” Business 2.0, March 6, 2001,
pp. 40–42; Amy E. Cortese, “Good-Bye to Fixed
Pricing?” BusinessWeek, May 4, 1998, pp. 71–84.
For a discussion of some of the basic academic
issues involved, see Florian Zettelmeyer, “Expanding
to the Internet: Pricing and Communication Strategies
when Firms Compete on Multiple Channels,” Journal
of Marketing Research 37 (August 2000), pp.
292–308; John G. Lynch Jr. and Dan Ariely, “Wine
Online: Search Costs Affect Competition on Price,
Quality, and Distribution,” Marketing Science 19
(Winter 2000), pp. 83–103; Rajiv Lal and Miklos
Sarvary, “When and How Is the Internet Likely to
Decrease Price Competition?” Marketing Science 18
(Fall 1999), pp. 485–503.
6. Daniel Fisher, “Cheap Seats,” Forbes, August 24, 2009,
pp. 102–3.
7. Bernard Condon, “The Haggle Economy,” Forbes,
June 8, 2009, pp. 26–27.
8. For a thorough review of pricing research, see Chezy
Ofir and Russell S. Winer, “Pricing: Economic and
Behavioral Models,” Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley,
eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage
Publications, 2002).
9. Based on Pia Sarkar, “Which Shirt Costs $275?—
Brand Loyalty, Bargain Hunting, and Unbridled Luxury
All Play a Part in the Price You’ll Pay for a T-Shirt,”
Final Edition, March 15, 2007, p. C1. Reprinted by
permission.
10. Bruce Horovitz, “Sale, Sale, Sale: Today Everyone
Wants a Deal,” USA Today, April 21, 2010, pp. 1A–2A.
11. Sbriya Rice, “‘I Can’t Afford Surgery in the U.S.,’ Says
Bargain Shopper,” CNN, www.cnn.com, April 26, 2010.
E38

Endnotes

12. Jay Greene, “Selling $8 Soap in an Era of Frugality,”
BusinessWeek, November 30, 2009, p. 66.
13. Peter R. Dickson and Alan G. Sawyer, “The Price
Knowledge and Search of Supermarket Shoppers,”
Journal of Marketing 54 (July 1990), pp. 42–53. For
a methodological qualification, however, see Hooman
Estalami, Alfred Holden, and Donald R. Lehmann,
“Macro-Economic Determinants of Consumer Price
Knowledge: A Meta-Analysis of Four Decades of
Research,” International Journal of Research in
Marketing 18 (December 2001), pp. 341–55.
14. For a comprehensive review, see Tridib Mazumdar,
S. P. Raj, and Indrajit Sinha, “Reference Price Research:
Review and Propositions,” Journal of Marketing 69
(October 2005), pp. 84–102. For a different point of
view, see Chris Janiszewski and Donald R. Lichtenstein,
“A Range Theory Account of Price Perception,” Journal
of Consumer Research 25 (March 1999), pp. 353–68.
15. For a discussion of how “incidental” prices outside
the category can serve as contextual reference
prices, see Joseph C. Nunes and Peter Boatwright,
“Incidental Prices and Their Effect on Willingness to
Pay,” Journal of Marketing Research 41 (November
2004), pp. 457–66.
16. K. N. Rajendran and Gerard J. Tellis, “Contextual and
Temporal Components of Reference Price,” Journal of
Marketing 58 (January 1994), pp. 22–34; Gurumurthy
Kalyanaram and Russell S. Winer, “Empirical
Generalizations from Reference-Price Research,”
Marketing Science 14 (Summer 1995), pp. G161–69.
See also, Ritesh Saini, Raghunath Singh Rao, and
Ashwani Monga, “Is the Deal Worth My Time? The
Interactive Effect of Relative and Referent Thinking on
Willingness to Seek a Bargain,” Journal of Marketing
74 (January 2010), pp. 34–48.
17. Gurumurthy Kalyanaram and Russell S. Winer,
“Empirical Generalizations from Reference-Price
Research,” Marketing Science 14 (Summer 1995),
pp. 161–69.
18. Glenn E. Mayhew and Russell S. Winer, “An Empirical
Analysis of Internal and External Reference-Price
Effects Using Scanner Data,” Journal of Consumer
Research 19 (June 1992), pp. 62–70.
19. Robert Ziethammer, “Forward-Looking Buying in
Online Auctions,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(August 2006), pp. 462–76.
20. John T. Gourville, “Pennies-a-Day: The Effect of
Temporal Reframing on Transaction Evaluation,”
Journal of Consumer Research 24 (March 1998),
pp. 395–408.
21. Gary M. Erickson and Johny K. Johansson, “The Role
of Price in Multi-Attribute Product-Evaluations,”
Journal of Consumer Research 12 (September 1985),
pp. 195–99.
22. Wilfred Amaldoss and Sanjay Jain, “Pricing of
Conspicuous Goods: A Competitive Analysis of Social
Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 42 (February
2005); Angela Chao and Juliet B. Schor, “Empirical
Tests of Status Consumption: Evidence from Women’s

Cosmetics,” Journal of Economic Psychology 19
(January 1998), pp. 107–31.
23. Mark Stiving and Russell S. Winer, “An Empirical
Analysis of Price Endings with Scanner Data,” Journal
of Consumer Research 24 (June 1997), pp. 57–68.
24. Eric T. Anderson and Duncan Simester, “Effects of $9
Price Endings on Retail Sales: Evidence from Field
Experiments,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 1
(March 2003), pp. 93–110.
25. Eric Anderson and Duncan Simester, “Mind Your
Pricing Cues,” Harvard Business Review, September
2003, pp. 96–103.
26. Robert M. Schindler and Patrick N. Kirby, “Patterns of
Rightmost Digits Used in Advertised Prices:
Implications for Nine-Ending Effects,” Journal of
Consumer Research 24 (September 1997),
pp. 192–201.
27. Anderson and Simester, “Mind Your Pricing Cues,”
Harvard Business Review, September 2003,
pp. 96–103.
28. Ibid.
29. Daniel J. Howard and Roger A. Kerin, “Broadening the
Scope of Reference-Price Advertising Research: A
Field Study of Consumer Shopping Involvement,”
Journal of Marketing 70 (October 2006), pp. 185–204.
30. Robert C. Blattberg and Kenneth Wisniewski,
“Price-Induced Patterns of Competition,” Marketing
Science 8 (Fall 1989), pp. 291–309; Katherine
N. Lemon and Stephen M. Nowlis, “Developing
Synergies between Promotions and Brands in
Different Price-Quality Tiers,” Journal of Marketing
Research 39 (May 2002), pp. 171–85; but see also,
Serdar Sayman, Stephen J. Hoch, and Jagmohan
S. Raju, “Positioning of Store Brands,” Marketing
Science 21 (Fall 2002), pp. 378–97.
31. Shantanu Dutta, Mark J. Zbaracki, and Mark Bergen,
“Pricing Process as a Capability: A Resource-Based
Perspective,” Strategic Management Journal 24
(July 2003), pp. 615–30.
32. “To All iPhone Customers,” Apple Inc., www.apple.com/
hotnews/openiphoneletter; Gary F. Gebhardt, “Price
Skimming’s Unintended Consequences,” Marketing
Science Institute Working Paper Series, MSI Report
No. 09-109.
33. Michael Silverstein and Neil Fiske, Trading Up: The
New American Luxury (New York: Portfolio, 2003).
34. Christopher Lawton, “A Liquor Maverick Shakes Up
Industry with Pricey Brands,” Wall Street Journal, May
21, 2003.
35. Timothy Aeppel, “Seeking Perfect Prices, CEO Tears
Up the Rules,” Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2007.
36. Florian Zettelmeyer, Fiona Scott Morton, and Jorge
Silva-Risso, “How the Internet Lowers Prices: Evidence
from Matched Survey and Automobile Transaction
Data,” Journal of Marketing Research 43 (May 2006),
pp. 168–81; Jeffrey R. Brown and Austan Goolsbee,
“Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?
Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal

of Political Economy 110 (October 2002),
pp. 481–507.
37. Joo Heon Park and Douglas L. MacLachlan,
“Estimating Willingness to Pay with Exaggeration BiasCorrected Contingent Valuation Method,” Marketing
Science 27 (July–August 2008), pp. 691–98.
38. Walter Baker, Mike Marn, and Craig Zawada, “Price
Smarter on the Net,” Harvard Business Review,
February 2001, pp. 122–27.
39. Brian Bergstein, “The Price Is Right,” Associated Press,
April 29, 2007.
40. Thomas T. Nagle and Reed K. Holden, The Strategy
and Tactics of Pricing, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002).
41. For a summary of elasticity studies, see Dominique
M. Hanssens, Leonard J. Parsons, and Randall L.
Schultz, Market Response Models: Econometric
and Time Series Analysis (Boston: Kluwer, 1990),
pp. 187–91.
42. Tammo H. A. Bijmolt, Harald J. Van Heerde, and Rik G.
M. Pieters, “New Empirical Generalizations on the
Determinants of Price Elasticity,” Journal of Marketing
Research 42 (May 2005), pp. 141–56.
43. William W. Alberts, “The Experience Curve Doctrine
Reconsidered,” Journal of Marketing 53 (July 1989),
pp. 36–49.
44. Michael Sivy, “Japan’s Smart Secret Weapon,”
Fortune, August 12, 1991, p. 75.
45. Joseph Weber, “Over a Buck for Dinner? Outrageous,”
BusinessWeek, March 9, 2009, p. 57.
46. Reena Jane, “From India, the Latest Management
Fad,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, December 14, 2009,
p. 57; Julie Jargon, “General Mills Takes Several Steps
to Combat High Commodity Costs,” Wall Street
Journal, September 20, 2007; Mina Kimes, “Cereal
Cost Cutters,” Fortune, November 10, 2008, p. 24.
47. Jack Ewing, “The Next Wal-Mart?” BusinessWeek,
April 26, 2004, pp. 60–62; “German Discounter Aldi
Aims to Profit from Belt-Tightening in US,” DW
World.de, www.dw-world.de, January 15, 2009; Aldi,
www.aldi.com.
48. “Green Works Natural Cleaners and Sierra Club
Celebrate Two Year Anniversary; Doubling of
Natural Cleaning Category,” Green Works,
www.greenworkscleaners.com, June 28, 2010; “This or
That? Clorox Greenworks Cleaning Up in the Market
Tip of the Day,” Green Daily, www.greendaily.com,
January 24, 2009; “Annual GMA Award Recognizes
Clorox and Kettle Foods for Innovation and Creativity,”
GMA, www. gmaonline.org/awardssurvey/cpg.cfm,
August 5, 2008.
49. Kusum L. Ailawadi, Donald R. Lehmann, and Scott A.
Neslin, “Market Response to a Major Policy Change in
the Marketing Mix: Learning from Procter & Gamble’s
Value Pricing Strategy,” Journal of Marketing 65
(January 2001), pp. 44–61.
50. Timothy Aeppel, “Seeking Perfect Prices, CEO Tears
Up the Rules,” Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2007;
Endnotes

E39

Todd Shryock, “Parker Hannifin: Perpetual Motion,”
Smart Business Cleveland, October 1, 2005; Tom
Brennan, “High-Tech Parker Hannifin?” CNBC,
www.cnbc.com, April 29, 2008.
51. Bruce Einhorn, “Acer’s Game-Changing PC Offensive,”
BusinessWeek, April 20, 2009, p. 65; Bruce Einhorn
and Tim Culpan, “With Dell in the Dust, Acer Chases
HP,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 8, 2010,
pp. 58–59.
52. Tung-Zong Chang and Albert R. Wildt, “Price, Product
Information, and Purchase Intention: An Empirical
Study,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
22 (Winter 1994), pp. 16–27. See also, G. Dean Kortge
and Patrick A. Okonkwo, “Perceived Value Approach
to Pricing,” Industrial Marketing Management 22
(May 1993), pp. 133–40.
53. Michael Arndt, “PACCAR: Built for the Long-Haul,”
BusinessWeek, January 30, 2006; Jay Thompson, “The
2010 U.S. Diesel Engine Landscape—Paccar’s
Approach Will Be Most Changed Without Cat,” Gerson
Lehrman Group, www.glgroup.com; Angel Gonzales,
“Paccar’s Fuel-Saving Hybrid Truck Aimed at Nation’s
Distribution,” Seattle Times, July 29, 2008; Paccar,
www.paccar.com.
54. Anupam Mukerj, “Monsoon Marketing,” Fast Company,
April 2007, p. 22.
55. Marco Bertini and Luc Wathieu, “How to Stop
Customers from Fixating on Price,” Harvard Business
Review, May 2010, pp. 85–91.
56. James C. Anderson, Dipak C. Jain, and Pradeep
K. Chintagunta, “Customer Value Assessment in
Business Markets: A State-of-Practice Study,” Journal
of Business-to-Business Marketing 1 (Spring 1993),
pp. 3–29.
57. Bill Saporito, “Behind the Tumult at P&G,” Fortune,
March 7, 1994, pp. 74–82. For empirical analysis of its
effects, see Kusim L. Ailawadi, Donald R. Lehmann,
and Scott A. Neslin, “Market Response to a Major
Policy Change in the Marketing Mix: Learning from
Procter & Gamble’s Value Pricing Strategy,” Journal of
Marketing 65 (January 2001), pp. 44–61.
58. Laurie Burkitt, “Take It All Off,” Forbes, March 29, 2010,
p. 59; Dan Beucke, “A Blade Too Far,” BusinessWeek,
August 14, 2006; Jenn Abelson, “And Then There Were
Five,” Boston Globe, September 15, 2005; Jack Neff,
“Six-Blade Blitz,” Advertising Age, September 19,
2005, pp. 3, 53; Editorial, “Gillette Spends Smart on
Fusion,” Advertising Age, September 26, 2005, p. 24.
59. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Value Pricing,” Marketing News,
January 15, 2008, p. 08.
60. Stephen J. Hoch, Xavier Dreze, and Mary J. Purk,
“EDLP, Hi-Lo, and Margin Arithmetic,” Journal of
Marketing 58 (October 1994), pp. 16–27; Rajiv Lal and
R. Rao, “Supermarket Competition: The Case of
Everyday Low Pricing,” Marketing Science 16 (Winter
1997), pp. 60–80; Michael Tsiros and David
M. Hardesty, “Ending a Price Promotion: Retracting It
in One Step or Phasing It Out Gradually,” Journal of
Marketing 74 (January 2010), pp. 49–64.
E40

Endnotes

61. Joseph W. Alba, Carl F. Mela, Terence A. Shimp, and
Joel E. Urbany, “The Effect of Discount Frequency and
Depth on Consumer Price Judgments,” Journal of
Consumer Research 26 (September 1999),
pp. 99–114; Paul B. Ellickson and Sanjog Misra,
“Supermarket Pricing Strategies,” Marketing Science,
27 (September–October 2008), pp. 811–28.
62. David Welch, “Haggling Starts to Go the Way of the Tail
Fin,” BusinessWeek, October 29, 2007, pp. 71–72.
63. Sean Gregory, “Dollar Stores: A Great Price for the
Recession,” Time, October 6, 2009; Robert Stammers,
“Dollar Stores Defy Market,” Forbes.com, March 5,
2009; John Dobosz, “Putting Family Dollar on the
Shopping List,” Forbes, August 23, 2006; Jeff Meyer,
“The Mad Dash to the Dollar Shop,” Christian Science
Monitor, August 4, 2003, p. 13; “Low Prices, Treasure
Hunts Build Dollar Empire,” DSN Retailing Today,
November 24, 2003, pp. 23–24.
64. Ethan Smith and Sara Silver, “To Protect Its Box-Office
Turf, Ticketmaster Plays Rivals’ Tune,” Wall Street
Journal, September 12, 2006.
65. “Royal Mail Drives Major Cost Savings through Free
Markets,” Free Markets press release, December 15,
2003.
66. Using expected profit for setting price makes sense for
the seller that makes many bids. The seller who bids
only occasionally or who needs a particular contract
badly will not find it advantageous to use expected
profit. This criterion does not distinguish between a
$1,000 profit with a 0.10 probability and a $125 profit
with a 0.80 probability. Yet the firm that wants to keep
production going would prefer the second contract to
the first.
67. Bernard Condon, “The Haggle Economy,” Forbes,
June 8, 2009, pp. 26–27; Sandy D. Jap, “The Impact of
Online Reverse Auction Design on Buyer-Supplier
Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 71 (January 2007),
pp. 146–59; Sandy D. Jap, “An Exploratory Study of
the Introduction of Online Reverse Auctions,” Journal
of Marketing 67 (July 2003), pp. 96–107.
68. Paul W. Farris and David J. Reibstein, “How Prices,
Expenditures, and Profits Are Linked,” Harvard Business
Review, November–December 1979, pp. 173–84. See
also, Makoto Abe, “Price and Advertising Strategy of a
National Brand against Its Private-Label Clone: A
Signaling Game Approach,” Journal of Business
Research 33 (July 1995), pp. 241–50.
69. Eugene H. Fram and Michael S. McCarthy, “The True
Price of Penalties,” Marketing Management, October
1999, pp. 49–56.
70. Joel E. Urbany, “Justifying Profitable Pricing,” Journal
of Product and Brand Management 10 (2001),
pp. 141–57; Charles Fishman, “The Wal-Mart You Don’t
Know,” Fast Company, December 2003, pp. 68–80.
71. P. N. Agarwala, Countertrade: A Global Perspective
(New Delhi: Vikas, 1991); Michael Rowe, Countertrade
(London: Euromoney Books, 1989); Christopher
M. Korth, ed., International Countertrade (New York:
Quorum Books, 1987).

72. For an interesting discussion of a quantity surcharge,
see David E. Sprott, Kenneth C. Manning, and Anthony
Miyazaki, “Grocery Price Settings and Quantity
Surcharges,” Journal of Marketing 67 (July 2003),
pp. 34–46.
73. Michael V. Marn and Robert L. Rosiello, “Managing
Price, Gaining Profit,” Harvard Business Review,
September–October 1992, pp. 84–94. See also,
Kusum L. Ailawadi, Scott A. Neslin, and Karen Gedenk,
“Pursuing the Value-Conscious Consumer: Store
Brands versus National-Brand Promotions,” Journal of
Marketing 65 (January 2001), pp. 71–89; Gerard
J. Tellis, “Tackling the Retailer Decision Maze: Which
Brands to Discount, How Much, When, and Why?”
Marketing Science 14 (Summer 1995), pp. 271–99.
74. Michael J. Barone and Tirthankar Roy, “Does
Exclusivity Always Pay Off? Exclusive Price
Promotions and Consumer Response,” Journal of
Marketing 74 (March 2010), pp. 121–32.
75. Jay E. Klompmaker, William H. Rogers, and Anthony
E. Nygren, “Value, Not Volume,” Marketing
Management (May–June 2003), pp. 45–48; Lands’ End,
www.landsend.com, June 23, 2010.
76. Peter Burrows and Olga Kharif, “Can AT&T Tame the
iHogs,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, December 28, 2009
and January 4, 2010, pp. 21–22.
77. Ramarao Deesiraju and Steven M. Shugan, “Strategic
Service Pricing and Yield Management,” Journal of
Marketing 63 (January 1999), pp. 44–56; Robert
E. Weigand, “Yield Management: Filling Buckets,
Papering the House,” Business Horizons 42
(September–October 1999), pp. 55–64.
78. Charles Fishman, “Which Price Is Right?” Fast
Company, March 2003, pp. 92–102; Bob Tedeschi,
“E-Commerce Report,” New York Times, September
2, 2002; Faith Keenan, “The Price Is Really Right,”
BusinessWeek, March 31, 2003, pp. 62–67; Peter
Coy, “The Power of Smart Pricing,” BusinessWeek,
April 10, 2000, pp. 160–64. For a review of some
seminal work linking pricing decisions with
operational insights, see Moritz Fleischmann, Joseph
M. Hall, and David F. Pyke, “Research Brief: Smart
Pricing,” MIT Sloan Management Review (Winter
2004), pp. 9–13.
79. Mike France, “Does Predatory Pricing Make Microsoft
a Predator?” BusinessWeek, November 23, 1998,
pp. 130–32. Also see Joseph P. Guiltinan and Gregory
T. Gundlack, “Aggressive and Predatory Pricing: A
Framework for Analysis,” Journal of Advertising 60
(July 1996), pp. 87–102.
80. For more information on specific types of price
discrimination that are illegal, see Henry Cheeseman,
Business Law, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2007).
81. Bob Donath, “Dispel Major Myths about Pricing,”
Marketing News, February 3, 2003, p. 10. For an
interesting historical account, see Meghan R. Busse,
Duncan I. Simester, Florian Zettelmeyer, “‘The Best
Price You’ll Ever Get’: The 2005 Employee Discount

Pricing Promotions, in the U.S. Automobile Industry,”
Marketing Science 29 (March–April 2010), pp. 268–90.
82. Harald J. Van Heerde, Els Gijsbrechts, and Koen
Pauwels, “Winners and Losers in a Major Price War,”
Journal of Marketing Research 45 (October 2008),
pp. 499–518.
83. For a classic review, see Kent B. Monroe, “Buyers’
Subjective Perceptions of Price,” Journal of
Marketing Research 10 (February 1973), pp. 70–80.
See also, Z. John Zhang, Fred Feinberg, and
Aradhna Krishna, “Do We Care What Others Get?
A Behaviorist Approach to Targeted Promotions,”
Journal of Marketing Research 39 (August 2002),
pp. 277–91.
84. Margaret C. Campbell, “Perceptions of Pricing
Unfairness: Antecedents and Consequences,” Journal
of Marketing Research 36 (May 1999), pp. 187–99.
85. Lan Xia, Kent B. Monroe, and Jennifer L. Cox, “The
Price Is Unfair! A Conceptual Framework of Price
Fairness Perceptions,” Journal of Marketing 68
(October 2004), pp. 1–15; Eric T. Anderson and
Duncan Simester, “Does Demand Fall when Customers
Perceive That Prices Are Unfair? The Case of Premium
Pricing for Larger Sizes,” Marketing Science 27
(May–June 2008), pp. 492–500.
86. Eric Mitchell, “How Not to Raise Prices,” Small
Business Reports, November 1990, pp. 64–67.
87. Nirmalya Kumar, “Strategies to Fight Low-Cost Rivals,”
Harvard Business Review (December 2006): 104–12.
See also Michael F. Porter, Competitive Strategy:
Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors
(New York: Free Press, 1980); Adrian Ryans, Beating
Low Cost Competition: How Premium Brands Can
Respond to Cut-Price Rivals (West Sussex, England:
John Wiley & Sons, 2008); Jack Neff, “How the
Discounters Hurt Themsleves,” Advertising Age,
December 10, 2007, p. 12.

Chapter 15
1. Gloria Goodale, “Netflix: From Movies in the Mall to
Movies on Demand?” Christian Science Monitor,
September 1, 2006, p. 11; Timothy J. Mullaney,
“The Mail Order House That Clobbered Blockbuster,”
BusinessWeek, June 5, 2006, pp. 56–57; Jefferson
Graham, “Netflix Is Still Renting Strong,” USA Today,
July 1, 2009, p. 2B; Ronald Grover, Adam Satariano,
and Ari Levy, “Honest, Hollywood, Netflix Is Your
Friend,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 11, 2010,
pp. 54–55; Michael V. Copeland, “Tapping Tech’s
Beautiful Minds,” Fortune, October 12, 2009,
pp. 35–36; Clive Thompson, “If You Liked This, Sure
to Love That,” New York Times, November 21, 2008;
Jessica Mintz, “Redbox Machines Take on Netflix’s
Red Envelope,” USA Today, June 22, 2009; Michael
Kraus, “How Redbox Is Changing Retail,” Marketing
News, November 15, 2009, p. 23.
2. Anne T. Coughlan, Erin Anderson, Louis W. Stern, and
Adel I. El-Ansary, Marketing Channels, 7th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007).
Endnotes

E41

3. Louis W. Stern and Barton A. Weitz, “The Revolution in
Distribution: Challenges and Opportunities,” Long
Range Planning 30 (December 1997), pp. 823–29.
4. For an insightful summary of academic research, see
Erin Anderson and Anne T. Coughlan, “Channel
Management: Structure, Governance, and Relationship
Management,” Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds.,
Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage, 2001),
pp. 223–47. See also, Gary L. Frazier, “Organizing and
Managing Channels of Distribution,” Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Sciences 27 (Spring 1999),
pp. 226–40.
5. Kerry Capell, “Thinking Simple at Philips,”
BusinessWeek, December 11, 2006, p. 50; Royal
Philips Electronics Annual Report, 2009; “Philips—
Unfulfilled,” Brandchannel.com, June 20, 2005; Jennifer
L. Schenker, “Fine-Tuning a Fuzzy Image,”
TIMEeurope.com, Spring 2002.
6. Sarah E. Needleman, “Dial-a-Mattress Retailer Blames
Troubles on Stores, Executive Team,” Wall Street
Journal, July 14, 2009, p. B1.
7. Martin Wildberger, “Multichannel Business Basics
for Successful E-Commerce,” Electronic Commerce
News, September 16, 2002, p. 1; Matthew Haeberle,
“REI Overhauls Its E-Commerce,” Chain Store Age,
January 2003, p. 64.
8. Chekitan S. Dev and Don E. Schultz, “In the Mix: A
Customer-Focused Approach Can Bring the Current
Marketing Mix into the 21st Century,” Marketing
Management 14 (January–February 2005).
9. www.oracle.com, December 09, 2010.
10. www.apple.com, December 09, 2010.
11. Robert Shaw and Philip Kotler, “Rethinking the
Chain,” Marketing Management (July/August 2009),
pp. 18–23.
12. Anne T. Coughlan, “Channel Management: Structure,
Governance, and Relationship Management,” Bart
Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of
Marketing (London: Sage, 2001), pp. 223–47.
13. For additional information on backward channels, see
Marianne Jahre, “Household Waste Collection as a
Reverse Channel: A Theoretical Perspective,”
International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics 25 (1995), pp. 39–55; Terrance L. Pohlen and
M. Theodore Farris II, “Reverse Logistics in Plastics
Recycling,” International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics 22 (1992), pp. 35–37.
14. Greenopolis, www.greenopolis.com, December 09,
2010.
15. William M. Bulkeley, “Kodak Revamps Wal-Mart
Kiosks,” Wall Street Journal, September 6, 2006,
p. B2; Faith Keenan, “Big Yellow’s Digital Dilemma,”
BusinessWeek, March 24, 2003, pp. 80–81.
16. www.clevelandclinic.org, December 09, 2010; Geoff
Colvin, “The Cleveland Clinic’s Delos Cosgrove,”
Fortune, March 1, 2010, pp. 38–45.
17. Asim Ansari, Carl F. Mela, and Scott A. Neslin,
“Customer Channel Migration,” Journal of Marketing

E42

Endnotes

Research 45 (February 2008), pp. 60–76; Jacquelyn
S. Thomas and Ursula Y. Sullivan, “Managing
Marketing Communications,” Journal of Marketing 69
(October 2005), pp. 239–51; Sridhar Balasubramanian,
Rajagopal Raghunathan, and Vijay Mahajan,
“Consumers in a Multichannel Environment: Product
Utility, Process Utility, and Channel Choice,” Journal of
Interactive Marketing 19 (Spring 2005), pp. 12–30;
Edward J. Fox, Alan L. Montgomery, and Leonard M.
Lodish, “Consumer Shopping and Spending across
Retail Formats,” Journal of Business 77 (April 2004),
pp. S25–S60.
18. Peter Child, Suzanne Heywood, and Michael Kilger,
“Do Retail Brands Travel?” McKinsey Quarterly
(January 2002), pp. 11–13. For another taxonomy of
shoppers, see also Paul F. Nunes and Frank
V. Cespedes, “The Customer Has Escaped,” Harvard
Business Review, November 2003, pp. 96–105.
19. John Helyar, “The Only Company Wal-Mart Fears,”
Fortune, November 24, 2003, pp. 158–66. See also,
Michael Silverstein and Neil Fiske, Trading Up: The New
American Luxury (New York: Portfolio, 2003).
20. Susan Broniarczyk, “Product Assortment,” Curtis
Haugtvedt, Paul Herr, and Frank Kardes, eds.,
Handbook of Consumer Psychology, (New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2008), pp. 755–79;
Alexander Chernev and Ryan Hamilton, “Assortment
Size and Option Attractiveness in Consumer Choice
Among Retailers,” Journal of Marketing Research 46
(June 2009), pp. 410–20; Richard A. Briesch, Pradeep
K. Chintagunta, and Edward J. Fox, “How Does
Assortment Affect Grocery Store Choice,” Journal of
Marketing Research 46 (April 2009), pp. 176–89.
21. Anne T. Coughlan, Erin Anderson, Louis W. Stern, and
Adel I. El-Ansary, Marketing Channels, 7th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007).
22. Louis P. Bucklin, A Theory of Distribution Channel
Structure (Berkeley: Institute of Business and
Economic Research, University of California, 1966).
23. Katrijn Gielens and Marnik G. Dekimpe, “The Entry
Strategies Retail Firms into Transition Economies,”
Journal of Marketing 71 (April 2007), pp. 196–212.
24. Alex Frankel, “Magic Shop,” Fast Company, November
2007, pp. 45–49; “Apple Reports Fourth Quarter
Results,” www.apple.com, October 19, 2009; Jerry
Useem, “Simply Irresistible,” Fortune, March 19, 2007,
pp. 107–12; Nick Wingfield, “How Apple’s Store
Strategy Beat the Odds,” Wall Street Journal, May 17,
2006; Alice Z. Cuneo, “Apple Transcends as Lifestyle
Brand,” Advertising Age, June 15, 2003, pp. S2, S6;
Tobi Elkin, “Apple Gambles with Retail Plan,”
Advertising Age, June 24, 2001.
25. Allison Enright, “Shed New Light,” Marketing News,
May 1, 2006, pp. 9–10.
26. “Exclusives Becoming a Common Practice,” DSN
Retailing Today, February 9, 2004, pp. 38, 44.
27. “Trouser Suit,” Economist, November 24, 2001, p. 56.
28. www.stihlusa.com/corporate/corporate_facts.html.

29. “Nike Says No to Blue-Light Specials,” Fortune, May 4,
2005.
30. Robert K. Heady, “Online Bank Offers Best Rates,”
South Florida Sun-Sentinel, November 22, 2004.
31. Anderson and Coughlan, “Channel Management:
Structure, Governance, and Relationship
Management,” Handbook of Marketing (London:
Sage Publications, 2002), pp. 223–47; Michaela
Draganska, Daniel Klapper, and Sofia B. Villa-Boas,
“A Larger Slice or a Larger Pie? An Empirical
Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution
Channel,” Marketing Science 29 (January–February
2010), pp. 57–74.
32. These bases of power were identified in John
R. P. French and Bertram Raven, “The Bases of Social
Power,” Dorwin Cartwright, ed., Studies in Social
Power (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1959),
pp. 150–67.
33. Joydeep Srivastava and Dipankar Chakravarti,
“Channel Negotiations with Information Asymmetries:
Contingent Influences of Communication and
Trustworthiness Reputations,” Journal of Marketing
Research 46 (August 2009), pp. 557–72.
34. Daniel Corsten and Nirmalya Kumar, “Do Suppliers
Benefit from Collaborative Relationships with Large
Retailers? An Empirical Investigation of Efficient
Consumer Response Adoption,” Journal of Marketing
69 (July 2005), pp. 80–94; for some related research,
see Ashwin W. Joshi, “Continuous Supplier
Performance Improvement: Effects of Collaborative
Communication and Control,” Journal of Marketing 73
(January 2009), pp. 133–50.
35. Russ Mitchell, “Can Dell Save Dell?” Condé Nast
Portfolio, July 2008, pp. 84–90; Cliff Edwards, “Dell’s
Do-Over,” BusinessWeek, October 26, 2009,
pp. 37–40; Christopher Helman, “The Second
Coming,” Forbes, December 10, 2007, pp. 79–86;
David Whitford, “Uh . . . Maybe I Should Drive,”
Fortune, April 30, 2007, pp. 125–28; Louise Lee, “It’s
Dell vs. the Dell Way,” BusinessWeek, March 6, 2006,
pp. 61–62; David Kirkpatrick, “Dell in the Penalty Box,”
Fortune, September 18, 2006, pp. 70–78; Nanette
Byrnes, Peter Burrows, and Louise Lee, “Dark Days at
Dell,” BusinessWeek, September 4, 2006, pp. 27–30;
Elizabeth Corcoran, “A Bad Spell for Dell,” Forbes,
June 19, 2006, pp. 44–46.
36. For a detailed case study example, see Jennifer
Shang, Tuba Pinar Yildrim, Pandu Tadikamalla, Vikas
Mittal, and Lawrence Brown, “Distribution Network
Redesign for Marketing Competitiveness,” Journal of
Marketing 73 (March 2009), pp. 146–63.
37. Xinlei Chen, George John, and Om Narasimhan,
“Assessing the Consequences of a Channel Switch,”
Marketing Science 27 (May–June 2008), pp.
398–416.
38. Thomas H. Davenport and Jeanne G. Harris, Competing
on Analytics: The New Science of Winning (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2007).

39. Junhong Chu, Pradeep K. Chintagunta, and Naufel J.
Vilcassim, “Assessing the Economic Value of Distribution
Channels: An Application to the Personal Computer
Industry,” Journal of Marketing Research 44 (February
2007), pp. 29–41.
40. Bruce Einhorn, “China: Where Retail Dinosaurs Are
Thriving,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, February 1 and 8,
2010, p. 64.
41. “Unshackling the Chain Stores,” Economist, May 31,
2008, pp. 69–70.
42. Richard Gibson, “U.S. Franchises Find Opportunities
to Grow Abroad,” Wall Street Journal, August 11, 2009,
p. B5.
43. “Crossroads,” Economist, March 17, 2007, pp. 71–72;
“Shopped Around,” Economist, October 18, 2008,
p. 74; Carol Matlack, “A French Wal-Mart’s Global
Blitz, BusinessWeek, December 21, 2009, pp. 64–65.
44. Michael Arndt, “Urban Outfitters Grow-Slow Strategy,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 1, 2010, p. 56;
Michael Arndt, “How to Play It: Apparel Makers,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 1, 2010, p. 61.
45. Matthew Boyle and Michael V. Copeland, “Tesco
Reinvents the 7-Eleven,” Fortune, November 26,
2007, p. 34.
46. Jenifer Reingold, “The British (Retail) Invasion,”
Fortune, July 7, 2008, pp. 132–38; Ruth La Ferla, “But
Will It Play in Manhattan,” New York Times, June 21,
2006; Damien Reece, “Topshop’s Injection of True Brit
Stirs Up the Big Apple,” Daily Telegraph, April 2, 2009.
47. Stefan Wuyts, Stefan Stremersch, Christophe Van Den
Bulte, and Philip Hans Franses, “Vertical Marketing
Systems for Complex Products: A Triadic Perspective,”
Journal of Marketing Research 41 (November 2004),
pp. 479–87.
48. Russell Johnston and Paul R. Lawrence, “Beyond
Vertical Integration: The Rise of the Value-Adding
Partnership,” Harvard Business Review, July–August
1988, pp. 94–101. See also, Arnt Bovik and George
John, “When Does Vertical Coordination Improve
Industrial Purchasing Relationships,” Journal of
Marketing 64 (October 2000), pp. 52–64; Judy A.
Siguaw, Penny M. Simpson, and Thomas L. Baker,
“Effects of Supplier Market Orientation on Distributor
Market Orientation and the Channel Relationship: The
Distribution Perspective,” Journal of Marketing 62 (July
1998), pp. 99–111; Narakesari Narayandas and Manohar
U. Kalwani, “Long-Term Manufacturer– Supplier
Relationships: Do They Pay Off for Supplier Firms?”
Journal of Marketing 59 (January 1995), pp. 1–16.
49. Raji Srinivasan, “Dual Distribution and Intangible Firm
Value: Franchising in Restaurant Chains,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (July 2006), pp. 120–35.
50. www.citizensbank.com, December 09, 2010.
51. www.disney.com, December 09, 2010; Joyceann
Cooney, “Mooney’s Kingdom,” License, October 1, 2006.
52. Coach Inc. Form 10-K filed with SEC on August 19, 2009.
53. Rajkumar Venkatesan, V. Kumar, and Nalini
Ravishanker, “Multichannel Shopping: Causes and

Endnotes

E43

Consequences,” Journal of Marketing 71 (April 2007),
pp. 114–32.
54. Based on Rowland T. Moriarty and Ursula Moran,
“Marketing Hybrid Marketing Systems,” Harvard
Business Review, November–December 1990,
pp. 146–55.
55. Susan Casey, “Eminence Green,” Fortune, April 2,
2007, pp. 64–70.
56. Barbara Darow, “Oracle’s New Partner Path,” CRN,
August 21, 2006, p. 4.
57. Anne Coughlan and Louis Stern, “Marketing Channel
Design and Management,” Dawn Iacobucci, ed.,
Kellogg on Marketing (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2001), pp. 247–69.
58. Nirmalya Kumar, “Some Tips on Channel
Management,” rediff.com, July 1, 2005.
59. Matthew Boyle, “Brand Killers,” Fortune, August 11,
2003, pp. 51–56; for an opposing view, see Anthony
J. Dukes, Esther Gal-Or, and Kannan Srinivasan,
“Channel Bargaining with Retailer Asymmetry,” Journal
of Marketing Research 43 (February 2006), pp. 84–97.
60. Jerry Useem, Julie Schlosser, and Helen Kim, “One
Nation under Wal-Mart,” Fortune (Europe), March 3,
2003.
61. Sreekumar R. Bhaskaran and Stephen M. Gilbert,
“Implications of Channel Structure for Leasing or
Selling Durable Goods,” Marketing Science 28
(September–October 2009), pp. 918–34.
62. For an example of when conflict can be viewed as
helpful, see Anil Arya and Brian Mittendorf, “Benefits of
Channel Discord in the Sale of Durable Goods,”
Marketing Science 25 (January–February 2006),
pp. 91–96; and Nirmalya Kumar, “Living with Channel
Conflict,” CMO Magazine, October 2004.
63. This section draws on Coughlan, Anderson, Stern, and
El-Ansary, Marketing Channels, Chapter 9. See also,
Jonathan D. Hibbard, Nirmalya Kumar, and Louis W.
Stern, “Examining the Impact of Destructive Acts in
Marketing Channel Relationships,” Journal of
Marketing Research 38 (February 2001), pp. 45–61;
Kersi D. Antia and Gary L. Frazier, “The Severity of
Contract Enforcement in Interfirm Channel
Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 65 (October
2001), pp. 67–81; James R. Brown, Chekitan S. Dev,
and Dong-Jin Lee, “Managing Marketing Channel
Opportunism: The Efficiency of Alternative Governance
Mechanisms,” Journal of Marketing 64 (April 2000),
pp. 51–65; Alberto Sa Vinhas and Erin Anderson, “How
Potential Conflict Drives Channel Structure: Concurrent
(Direct and Indirect) Channels,” Journal of Marketing
Research 42 (November 2005), pp. 507–15.
64. Nirmalya Kumar, “Living with Channel Conflict,” CMO
Magazine, October 2004.
65. Andrew Kaplan, “All Together Now?” Beverage World,
March 2007, pp. 14–16.
66. Christina Passriello, “Fashionably Late? Designer
Brands Are Starting to Embrace E-Commerce,” Wall
Street Journal, May 19, 2006.
E44

Endnotes

67. Greg Johnson, “Gray Wail: Southern California
Companies Are among the Many Upscale
Manufacturers Voicing Their Displeasure about
Middlemen Delivering Their Goods into the Hands of
Unauthorized Discount Retailers,” Los Angeles Times,
March 30, 1997. Also see Paul R. Messinger and
Chakravarthi Narasimhan, “Has Power Shifted in the
Grocery Channel?” Marketing Science 14 (Spring
1995), pp. 189–223.
68. Joel C. Collier and Carol C. Bienstock, “How Do
Customers Judge Quality in an E-tailer,” MIT Sloan
Management Review (Fall 2006), pp. 35–40.
69. Coremetrics Benchmark December US Retail,
www.coremetrics.com/ downloads/coremetricsbenchmark-industry-report-2008-12-us.pdf.
70. Jeff Borden, “The Right Tools,” Marketing News, April 15,
2008, pp. 19–21.
71. Alexis K. J. Barlow, Noreen Q. Siddiqui, and Mike
Mannion, “Development in Information and
Communication Technologies for Retail Marketing
Channels,” International Journal of Retail and Distribution
Management 32 (March 2004), pp. 157–63; G&J
Electronic Media Services, 7th Wave of the GfK-OnlineMonitor (Hamburg: GfK Press, 2001).
72. Martin Holzwarth, Chris Janiszewski, and Marcus
M. Newmann, “The Influence of Avatars on Online
Consumer Shopping Behavior,” Journal of Marketing
70 (October 2006), pp. 19–36.
73. Ann E. Schlosser, Tiffany Barnett White, and Susan M.
Lloyd, “Converting Web Site Visitors into Buyers: How
Web Site Investment Increases Consumer Trusting
Beliefs and Online Purchase Intentions,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (April 2006), pp. 133–48.
74. Ronald Abler, John S. Adams, and Peter Gould, Spatial
Organizations: The Geographer’s View of the World
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1971), pp. 531–32.
75. “China’s Pied Piper,” Economist, September 23, 2006,
p. 80; Alibaba.com, www.alibaba.com, December 09,
2010; Garry Barker, “The Treasure Keeps Coming for
Alibaba,” The Age, October 27, 2009; Jessica
E. Vascellaro, “Alibaba.com Plans U.S Push,” Wall
Street Journal, August 7, 2009; Bruce Einhorn, “At
Alibaba, Investors Come Last,” BusinessWeek, August
17, 2009, p. 50.
76. For an in-depth academic examination, see John
G. Lynch Jr. and Dan Ariely, “Wine Online: Search Costs
and Competition on Price, Quality, and Distribution,”
Marketing Science 19 (Winter 2000), pp. 83–103.
77. Andrea Chang, “Retailers Fuse Stores with ECommerce,” Los Angeles Times, June 27, 2010.
78. Anjali Cordeiro, “Procter & Gamble Sees Aisle
Expansion on the Web,” Wall Street Journal, September
2, 2009, p. B6A; Anjali Cordeiro and Ellen Byron,
“Procter & Gamble to Test Online Store to Study Buying
Habits,” Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2010.
79. Xubing Zhang, “Retailer’s Multichannel and Price
Advertising Strategies,” Marketing Science 28
(November–December 2009), pp. 1080–94.

80. Susan Fournier and Lara Lee, “Getting Brand
Communities Right,” Harvard Business Review, April
2009, pp. 105–11; “New Harley Davidson Accessory
and Clothing Store,” PRLog, July 21, 2009; Bob
Tedeshi, “How Harley Revved Online Sales,” Business
2.0, December 2002–January 2003, pp. 44; John
W. Schouten, and James H. McAlexander, “Market
Impact of a Consumption Subculture: The HarleyDavidson Mystique,” Gary J. Bamossy and W. Fred
van Raaij, eds., European Advances in Consumer
Research (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer
Research, 1993), pp. 389–93.
81. Nanette Byrnes, “More Clicks at the Bricks,”
BusinessWeek, December 17, 2007, pp. 50–51.
82. Douglas Lamont, Conquering the Wireless World: The
Age of M-Commerce (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2001); Herbjørn Nysveen, Per E. Pedersen, Helge
Thorbjørnsen, and Pierre Berthon, “Mobilizing the
Brand: The Effects of Mobile Services on Brand
Relationships and Main Channel Use,” Journal of
Service Research 7 (2005), pp. 257–76; Venkatesh
Shankar and Sridhar Balasubramanian, “Mobile
Marketing: A Synthesis and Prognosis,” Journal of
Interactive Marketing 23 (2009), pp. 118–29; Venkatesh
Shankar, Alladi Venkatesh, Charles Hofacker, and
Prasad Naik, “Mobile Marketing in the Retailing
Environment: Current Insights and Future Research
Avenues,” special issue, Journal of Interactive
Marketing, co-editors Venkatesh Shankar and Manjit
Yadav, forthcoming.
83. “The Mobile Internet Report,” Morgan Stanley,
www.morganstanley.com, May 7, 2010.
84. Adam Cahill, Lars Albright, and Carl Howe, “Mobile
Advertising and Branding,” session as part of the Britt
Technology Impact Series, Tuck School of Business,
Dartmouth College, March 31, 2010; Alexandre Mars,
“Importing Mobile Marketing Tools,” Brandweek,
February 15, 2010, p. 17.
85. Reena Jana, “Retailers Are Learning to Love
Smartphones,” BusinessWeek, October 26, 2009.
86. Nanette Byrnes, “More Clicks at the Bricks,”
BusinessWeek, December 17, 2007, pp. 50–51.
87. Dan Butcher, “Dunkin’ Donuts Sweetens Dunkin’ Run
Campaign with Mobile,” Mobile Marketer, June 23,
2009; “Dunkin’ Donuts Unveils ‘Dunkin’ Run’
Technology to make Group Orders Faster, Easier and
More Fun,” Dunkin’ Donuts, press release, June 22,
2009, www.dunkindonuts.com; Rich Mathieson,
“Mobile Marketing: Dunkin’ Donuts Serves SMS,”
Chief Marketer, July 19, 2006.

Chapter 16
1. Helen Coster, “A Step Ahead,” Forbes, June 2, 2008,
pp. 78–80; Paula Andruss, “Delivering Wow Through
Service,” Marketing News, October 15, 2008, p. 10;
Jeffrey M. O’Brien, “Zappos Knows How to Kick It,”
Fortune, February 2, 2009, pp. 55–60; Brian Morrissey,
“Amazon to Buy Zappos,” Adweek, July 22, 2009;
Christopher Palmeri, “Now For Sale, the Zappos

Culture,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 11,
2010, p. 57.
2. Karsten Hansen and Vishal Singh, “Market Structure
Across Retail Formats,” Marketing Science 28
(July–August 2009), pp. 656–73.
3. “US Retail E-Commerce Down 3% in Q4, Up Just 6%
in 2008,” Retailer Daily, February 12, 2009.
4. Richard Gibson, “Even ‘Copycat’ Businesses Require
Creativity and Flexibility,” Wall Street Journal Online,
March 2004; Entrepreneur, www.entrepreneur.com,
December 09, 2010.
5. Raymund Flandez, “New Franchise Idea: Fewer Rules,
More Difference,” Wall Street Journal, September 18,
2007, p. B4.
6. Jena McGregor, “The Hard Sell,” BusinessWeek,
October 26, 2009, pp. 43–45.
7. Joseph Pereira and Ann Zimmerman, “For Toys “R”
Us, Holidays Are Open and Shut,” Wall Street Journal,
September 15, 2009, p. B8.
8. Eric Newman, “Retail Design for 2008: Thinking
Outside the Box,” Brandweek, December 17, 2007,
p. 26.
9. Scott Cendrowski, “Extreme Retailing,” Fortune, March
31, 2008, p. 14.
10. Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan, “Hot Kohl’s,” Wall Street Journal,
April 16, 2007.
11. “Reinventing the Store—the Future of Retailing,”
Economist, November 22, 2003, pp. 65–68.
12. Matthew Boyle, “IBM Goes Shopping,” Fortune,
November 27, 2006, pp. 77–78; Todd Wasserman,
“The Store of the Future,” Brandweek, December 17,
2007, pp. 23–25; Emma Ritch, “Supermarkets Go
Digital,” San Jose Business Journal, April 11, 2008;
Tim Dickey, “Electronic Shelf Labels,” Retail
Technology Trends, February 26, 2010.
13. Michael C. Bellas, “Shopper Marketing’s Instant
Impact,” Beverage World, November 2007, p. 18;
Richard Westlund, “Bringing Brands to Life: The Power
of In-Store Marketing,” Special Advertising
Supplement to Adweek, January 2010.
14. Pierre Chandon, J. Wesley Hutchinson, Eric T. Bradlow,
and Scott H. Young, “Does In-Store Marketing Work?
Effects of the Number and Position of Shelf Facings on
Brand Attention and Evaluation at the Point of
Purchase,” Journal of Marketing Research 73
(November 2009), pp. 1–17.
15. Anthony Dukes and Yunchuan Liu, “In-Store Media and
Distribution Channel Coordination,” Marketing Science,
29 (January–February 2010), pp. 94–107.
16. Michael Freedman, “The Eyes Have It,” Forbes,
September 4, 2006, p. 70.
17. Amy Merrick, “Asking ‘What Would Ann Do?’” Wall
Street Journal, September 15, 2006.
18. Charles Fishman, “The Anarchist’s Cookbook,”
Fast Company, July 2004, pp. 70–78; “Whole
Foods Market 2009 Annual Report,” Whole Foods
Market, www.wholefoodsmarket.com/company/pdfs/
ar09.pdf.
Endnotes

E45

19. Ann Zimmerman and Kris Hudson, “Chasing Upscale
Customers Tarnishes Mass-Market Jeweler,” Wall
Street Journal, June 26, 2006; Kris Hudson, “Signet
Sparkles with Jewelry Strategy,” Wall Street Journal,
June 26, 2006.
20. “JCPenney Transforms Catalog Strategy to Better
Serve Customer Preferences,” BusinessWire,
November 18, 2009; Robert Berner, “JCPenney Gets
the Net,” BusinessWeek, May 7, 2007, p. 70; Robert
Berner, “Penney: Back in Fashion,” BusinessWeek,
January 9, 2006, pp. 82–84.
21. Louise Lee, “Catalogs, Catalogs, Everywhere,”
BusinessWeek, December 4, 2006, pp. 32–34; Michael
J. Silverstein and Neil Fiske, Trading Up: The New
American Luxury (New York: Portfolio, 2003); “Victoria’s
Secret,” Case #6-0014, Center for Digital Strategies,
Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, 2002;
www.biz.yahoo.com, December 09, 2010.
22. Jessi Hempel, “Urban Outfitters, Fashion Victim,”
BusinessWeek, July 17, 2006, p. 60.
23. Robert Berner, “To Lure Teenager Mall Rats, You Need
the Right Cheese,” BusinessWeek, June 7, 2004, pp.
96–101; Aeropostale, www.aeropostale.com, December
09, 2010; Jeanine Poggi, “Best in Class: Price Is Right at
Aeropostale,” TheStreet, www.thestreet.com/story/
10514026/best-in-class-price-is-right-at-aeropostale.html,
June 16, 2009; “Aeropostale, Inc. Seeks New Faces for
Fall Ad Campaign with ‘Real Teens 2010’ Contest,” PR
Newswire, March 15, 2010.
24. Robert Berner, “Chanel’s American in Paris,”
BusinessWeek, January 29, 2007, pp. 70–71.
25. Mark Tatge, “Fun & Games,” Forbes, January 12, 2004,
pp. 138–44.
26. Vanessa O’Connell, “Reversing Field, Macy’s Goes
Local,” Wall Street Journal, April 21, 2008.
27. Diane Anderson, “RFID Technology Getting Static in
New Hampshire,” Brandweek, January 23, 2006,
p. 13; Mary Catherine O’Conner, “Gillette Fuses RFID
with Product Launch,” RFID Journal, March 27, 2006;
“The End of Privacy?” Consumer Reports, June 2006,
pp. 33–40; Erick Schonfeld, “Tagged for Growth,”
Business 2.0, December 2006, pp. 58–61; “Radio
Silence,” Economist, June 9, 2007, pp. 20–21; Todd
Lewan, “The Chipping of America,” Associated Press,
July 29, 2007.
28. Uta Werner, John McDermott, and Greg Rotz,
“Retailers at the Crossroads: How to Develop
Profitable New Growth Strategies,” Journal of Business
Strategy 25 (2004), pp. 10–17.
29. “Trader Joe’s Named a Breakaway Brand for 2009,”
Supermarket Industry News, August 17, 2009;
Christopher Palmeri. “Trader Joe’s Recipe for Success,”
BusinessWeek, February 21, 2008; Deborah Orr, “The
Cheap Gourmet,” Forbes, April 10, 2006, pp. 76–77;
Amy Wu, “A Specialty Food Store with a Discount
Attitude,” New York Times, July 27, 2003.
30. Venkatesh Shankar and Ruth N. Bolton, “An Empirical
Analysis of Determinants of Retailer Pricing Strategy,”
Marketing Science 23 (Winter 2004), pp. 28–49.
E46

Endnotes

31. www.target.com, December 09, 2010; Ann
Zimmerman, “Staying on Target,” Wall Street Journal,
May 7, 2007; Mya Frazier, “The Latest European
Import: Fast Fashion,” Advertising Age, January 9,
2006, p. 6; Julie Schlosser, “How Target Does It,”
Fortune, October 18, 2004, p. 100; Michelle Conlin,
“Look Who’s Stalking Walmart,” BusinessWeek,
December 7, 2009, pp. 30–36.
32. Duncan Simester, “Signaling Price Image Using
Advertised Prices,” Marketing Science 14 (Summer
1995), pp. 166–88; see also, Jiwoong Shin, “The
Role of Selling Costs in Signaling Price Image,”
Journal of Marketing Research 42 (August 2005),
pp. 305–12.
33. Frank Feather, The Future Consumer (Toronto: Warwick
Publishing, 1994), p. 171. Also see David R. Bell and
James M. Lattin, “Shopping Behavior and Consumer
Preference for Retail Price Format: Why ‘Large Basket’
Shoppers Prefer EDLP,” Marketing Science 17 (Spring
1998), pp. 66–68; Stephen J. Hoch, Xavier Dreeze, and
Mary E. Purk, “EDLP, Hi-Lo, and Margin Arithmetic,”
Journal of Marketing 58 (October 1994), pp. 1–15.
34. Sarah Fister Gale, “The Bookstore Battle,” Workforce
Management (January 2004), pp. 51–53.
35. Constance L. Hays, “Retailers Seeking to Lure
Customers with Service,” New York Times, December
1, 2003.
36. Amy Gillentine, “Marketing Groups Ignore Women at
Their Own Peril,” Colorado Springs Business Journal,
January 20, 2006; Mary Lou Quinlan, “Women Aren’t
Buying It,” Brandweek, June 2, 2003, pp. 20–22.
37. Cecile B. Corral, “Profits Pinched, Kohl’s Eyes
Market Share,” Home Textiles Today, February 27,
2009; Ilaina Jones, “Kohl’s Looking at Spots in
Manhattan,” Reuters, August 19, 2009; Cametta
Coleman, “Kohl’s Retail Racetrack,” Wall Street
Journal, March 1, 2000.
38. Mindy Fetterman and Jayne O’Donnell, “Just Browsing
at the Mall? That’s What You Think,” USA Today,
September 1, 2006.
39. “Reinventing the Store,” Economist, November 22,
2003, pp. 65–68; Moira Cotlier, “Census Releases
First E-Commerce Report,” Catalog Age, May 1,
2001; Associated Press, “Online Sales Boomed at
End of 2000,” Star-Tribune of Twin Cities, February
17, 2001; Kenneth T. Rosen and Amanda L. Howard,
“E-Tail: Gold Rush or Fool’s Gold?” California
Management Review, April 1, 2000, pp. 72–100.
40. Velitchka D. Kaltcheva and Barton Weitz, “When
Should a Retailer Create an Exciting Store
Environment?” Journal of Marketing 70 (January 2006),
pp. 107–18.
41. For more discussion, see Philip Kotler, “Atmospherics
as a Marketing Tool,” Journal of Retailing (Winter
1973–1974), pp. 48–64. Also see B. Joseph Pine II and
James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
42. Jeff Cioletti, “Super Marketing,” Beverage World
(November 2006), pp. 60–61.

43. Ben Paynter, “Happy Hour,” Fast Company, March
2010, p. 34; Jessi Hempel, “Social Media Meets
Retailing,” Fortune, March 22, 2010, p. 30.
44. Carol Tice, “Anchors Away: Department Stores Lose
Role at Malls,” Puget Sound Business Journal,
February 13, 2004, p. 1.
45. www.plma.com, April 3, 2010; Emily Bryson York,
“Don’t Blame Private Label Gains on the Recession,”
Advertising Age, April 21, 2009.
46. Kusum Ailawadi and Bari Harlam, “An Empirical
Analysis of the Determinants of Retail Margins: The
Role of Store-Brand Share,” Journal of Marketing 68
(January 2004), pp. 147–65.
47. For a detailed analysis of contemporary research on
private labels, see Michael R. Hyman, Dennis A. Kopf,
and Dongdae Lee, “Review of Literature—Future
Research Suggestions: Private Label Brands: Benefits,
Success Factors, and Future Research, Journal of
Brand Management 17 (March 2010), pp. 368–89. See
also, Kusum Ailawadi, Bari Harlam, Jacques Cesar,
and David Trounce, “Retailer Promotion Profitability:
The Role of Promotion, Brand, Category, and Market
Characteristics,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(November 2006), pp. 518–35; Kusum Ailawadi, Koen
Pauwels, and Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, “Private
Label Use and Store Loyalty,” Journal of Marketing 72
(November 2008), pp. 19–30.
48. Natasha Singer, “Drug Firms Apply Brand to
Generics,” New York Times, February 16, 2010; Casey
Feldman, “Generic Drug Superstars,” Fortune, August
5, 2009; Mina Kimes, “Teva: The King of Generic
Drugs,” Fortune, August 5, 2009; Jeanne Whalen,
“Betting $10 Billion on Generics, Novartis Seeks to
Inject Growth,” Wall Street Journal, May 4, 2006.
49. Michael Felding, “No Longer Plain, Simple,” Marketing
News, May 15, 2006, pp. 11–13; Rob Walker, “Shelf
Improvement,” New York Times, May 7, 2006.
50. Sonia Reyes, “Saving Private Labels,” Brandweek, May
8, 2006, pp. 30–34; Andrew Martin, “Store Brands Lift
Grocers in Troubled Times,” New York Times,
December 13, 2008.
51. Jim Chrizan, “Loblaw’s Reverses Private Label Trend,”
Packaging World, January 22, 2010; “Loblaw Launches
a New Line of Discount Store Brands,” Store Brand
Decisions, February 16, 2010; John J. Pierce, “Private
Label Stimulus,” Private Label, March/April 2009.
52. Brett Nelson, “Stuck in the Middle,” Forbes, August 15,
2005, p. 88; “Arrow Investor Fact Sheet 2009,” Arrow,
www.arrow.com.
53. James A. Narus and James C. Anderson, “Contributing
as a Distributor to Partnerships with Manufacturers,”
Business Horizons (September– October 1987). Also
see Hlavecek and McCuistion, “Industrial
Distributors—When, Who, and How,” pp. 96–101.
54. www.grainger.com/Grainger/wwg/start.shtml, May 8,
2010; Sean Callahan, “Close-up with Deb Oler,
VP-Grainger Industrial Supply Brand, W.W. Grainger,”
BtoB, March 3, 2010; Ian Heller, “The Secret of Being
Grainger,” www.ezinearticles.com, April 30, 2010.

55. “Who Has The Top Consumer Goods Industry Supply
Chains for 2008?” Supply Chain News, December 17,
2008; “Who Has The Top Retail Industry Supply Chains
for 2008?” Supply Chain News, January 5, 2009.
56. Johnson & Johnson 2007 Sustainability Report; talk by
panelist Chris Hacker, “Production Innovation and
Supply Chains: Creating Value for the Next Generation,”
Business and Society Conference, Tuck School of
Business at Dartmouth College, January 15, 2009.
57. William C. Copacino, Supply Chain Management (Boca
Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press, 1997); Robert Shaw and
Philip Kotler, “Rethinking the Chain: Making Marketing
Leaner, Faster, and Better,” Marketing Management
(July/August 2009), pp. 18–23.
58. “Shrink Rapped,” Economist, May 17, 2008, p. 80.
59. “U.S. Logistics Cost 10% of GDP,” Logistics Today,
June 26, 2008.
60. Pete Engardio, “Lean and Mean Gets Extreme,”
BusinessWeek, March 23 and 30, 2009, pp. 60–62;
Traci Gregory, “ConMed Takes Lean Approach,”
Central New York Business Journal, May 22, 2009.
61. Daisuke Wakabayashi, “How Lean Manufacturing Can
Backfire,” Wall Street Journal, January 30, 2010; for
some additional discussion of the downside of lean
manufacturing, see Brian Hindo, “At 3M, A Struggle
between Efficiency and Creativity,” BusinessWeek,
June 11, 2007.
62. The optimal order quantity is given by the formula Q* =
2DS/IC, where D = annual demand, S = cost to place
one order, and I = annual carrying cost per unit. Known
as the economic-order quantity formula, it assumes a
constant ordering cost, a constant cost of carrying an
additional unit in inventory, a known demand, and no
quantity discounts. For further reading on this subject,
see Richard J. Tersine, Principles of Inventory and
Materials Management, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1994).
63. William C. Copacino, Supply Chain Management (Boca
Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press, 1997), pp. 122–23.
64. “Shining Examples,” Economist: A Survey of Logistics,
June 17, 2006, pp. 4–6.
65. Renee DeGross, “Retailers Try eBay Overstocks,
Returns for Sale Online,” Atlanta Journal-Constitution,
April 10, 2004.
66. Chuck Salter, “Savvy, with Hints of Guile and
Resourcefulness,” Fast Company, February 2007,
p. 50; Heather Mcpherson, “Lots to Like about This
Concept: As a Wine Négociant, Cameron Hughes Can
Offer Premium Wines at Affordable Prices,” Knight
Ridder Tribune Business News, February 21, 2007, p. 1;
Phaedrea Hise and Joanne Chen, “Sleeping with the
Boss,” Forbes Small Business, February 2008,
pp. 68–78; Maureen Farrell, “Wine Workout,” Forbes,
March 30, 2009, pp. 64–65.
67. “Manufacturing Complexity,” Economist: A Survey of
Logistics, June 17, 2006, pp. 6–9.
68. Perry A. Trunick, “Nailing a Niche in Logistics,”
Logistics Today, March 4, 2008.
Endnotes

E47

Chapter 17
1. Ken Romanzi, “Reintroducing the Cranberry to
America!” Talk at the Tuck School of Business at
Dartmouth,” January 7, 2010; “Breakaway Brands:
Ocean Spray Tells It Straight from the Bog,”
MediaPost, October 9, 2006; Francis J. Kelly III and
Barry Silverstein, The Breakaway Brand (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2005).
2. Xueming Luo and Naveen Donthu, “Marketing’s
Credibility: A Longitudinal Investigation of Marketing
Communication Productivity and Shareholder Value,”
Journal of Marketing 70 (October 2006), pp. 70–91.
3. Margaret Coker, “Dubai Pulls Out the Stops—for
Naming Metro Stations, Lines Offered as Vehicles,”
Wall Street Journal, August 8, 2008; Linda Childers,
“Can’t-Escape TV,” Fast Company, July/August 2008,
p. 46; Louise Story, “Anywhere the Eye Can See, It’s
Likely to See an Ad,” New York Times, January 15,
2007; Laura Petrecca, “Product Placement—You Can’t
Escape It,” USA Today, October 11, 2006.
4. Burt Helm, “Attention-Deficit Advertising,”
BusinessWeek, May 5, 2008, p. 50; “Motorola’s ‘Say
Goodbye’ Campaign at Hong Kong Airport,” MobiAD
News, February 20, 2008.
5. Vanessa L. Facenda, “Kimberly-Clark’s Paper Trail
Leads to Creative Marketing,” Brandweek, January 14,
2008, p. 11.
6. Stuart Elliott, “Covering Many Bases for a Brand of
Blue Jeans,” New York Times, August 13, 2009; Giselle
Tsirulnik, “Gap Finds Right Fit with Mobile for New
Jeans Campaign,” Mobile Marketer, October 5, 2009;
“Gap Introduces America’s Best-Fitting Premium
Jeans,” PRNewswire, August 13, 2009; Jean-Claude
Larreche, “Gap Lacked Momentum, So Rightly Cut
TV,” Advertising Age, June 23, 2008, p. 26.
7. Some of these definitions are adapted from Peter
D. Bennett, ed., Dictionary of Marketing Terms
(Chicago: American Marketing Association, 1995).
8. Tom Duncan and Sandra Moriarty, “How Integrated
Marketing Communication’s ‘Touch Points’ Can
Operationalize the Service-Dominant Logic,” Robert
F. Lusch and Stephen L. Vargo, eds., The ServiceDominant Logic of Marketing: Dialog, Debate, and
Directions (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2006); Tom
Duncan, Principles of Advertising and IMC, 2nd ed.
(New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2005).
9. Noreen O’Leary, “Mint’s Fresh Approach: Marketing
on $700 a Year,” Brandweek, October 12, 2009,
p. 4; Coloribus Global Advertising Archive,
www.coloribus.com, December 09, 2010.
10. Theresa Howard, “Multiplatform Ads Clean Up at
Cannes,” USA Today, June 29, 2009, p. 3B; Kate
Nettleton, “Tribal DDB Amsterdam’s ‘Carousel’ for
Philips Scoops Cannes Lions 2009 Film Grand Prix,”
Campaign, June 29, 2009; Daniel Farey-Jones, “Philips
Promotes Home Cinema Range with Online Film
Premiere,” Campaign, February 18, 2010.
11. For an alternate communications model developed
specifically for advertising communications, see
E48

Endnotes

Barbara B. Stern, “A Revised Communication Model
for Advertising: Multiple Dimensions of the Source, the
Message, and the Recipient,” Journal of Advertising
(June 1994), pp. 5–15. For some additional
perspectives, see Tom Duncan and Sandra E. Morarity,
“A Communication-Based Marketing Model for
Managing Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 62
(April 1998), pp. 1–13.
12. Demetrios Vakratsas and Tim Ambler, “How
Advertising Works: What Do We Really Know?” Journal
of Marketing 63 (January 1999), pp. 26–43.
13. This section is based on the excellent text, John R.
Rossiter and Larry Percy, Advertising and Promotion
Management, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1997).
14. “GE Gets Smart with Energy Awareness,” Special
Advertising Section to Adweek and Brandweek,
October 14, 2009; “GE Plucks an Online Winner with
Smart Grid,” Special Advertising Section to Adweek
and Brandweek, October 14, 2009; “Smart Grid,” GE,
http://ge.ecomagination.com/smartgrid; “Augmented
Reality: Real Meets Virtual,” BizTechTalk, February 25,
2009.
15. James F. Engel, Roger D. Blackwell, and Paul W.
Minard, Consumer Behavior, 9th ed. (Fort Worth,
TX: Dryden, 2001).
16. John R. Rossiter and Larry Percy, Advertising and
Promotion Management, 2nd ed. (New York: McGrawHill, 1997).
17. James F. Engel, Roger D. Blackwell, and Paul W.
Minard, Consumer Behavior, 9th ed. (Fort Worth,
TX: Dryden, 2001).
18. Ayn E. Crowley and Wayne D. Hoyer, “An Integrative
Framework for Understanding Two-Sided Persuasion,”
Journal of Consumer Research 20 (March 1994),
pp. 561–74.
19. C. I. Hovland, A. A. Lumsdaine, and F. D. Sheffield,
Experiments on Mass Communication, vol. 3
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1949);
Crowley and Hoyer, “An Integrative Framework for
Understanding Two-Sided Persuasion.” For an
alternative viewpoint, see George E. Belch, “The
Effects of Message Modality on One- and Two-Sided
Advertising Messages,” Richard P. Bagozzi and Alice
M. Tybout, eds., Advances in Consumer Research
(Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
1983), pp. 21–26.
20. Curtis P. Haugtvedt and Duane T. Wegener, “Message
Order Effects in Persuasion: An Attitude Strength
Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research 21
(June 1994), pp. 205–18; H. Rao Unnava, Robert E.
Burnkrant, and Sunil Erevelles, “Effects of Presentation
Order and Communication Modality on Recall and
Attitude,” Journal of Consumer Research 21
(December 1994), pp. 481–90.
21. Sternthal and Craig, Consumer Behavior, pp. 282–84.
Sternthal and Craig, Consumer Behavior: An Information
Processing Perspective (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1982), pp. 282–84.

22. Michael R. Solomon, Consumer Behavior, 7th ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007).
23. Some recent research on humor in advertising, for
example, includes: Haseeb Shabbir and Des Thwaites,
“The Use of Humor to Mask Deceptive Advertising: It’s
No Laughing Matter,” Journal of Advertising 36
(Summer 2007), pp. 75–85; Thomas W. Cline and
James J. Kellaris, “The Influence of Humor Strength
and Humor Message Relatedness on Ad Memorability:
A Dual Process Model,” Journal of Advertising 36
(Spring 2007), pp. 55–67; H. Shanker Krishnan and
Dipankar Chakravarti, “A Process Analysis of the
Effects of Humorous Advertising Executions on Brand
Claims Memory,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 13
(2003), pp. 230–45.
24. “Follies,” Advertising Age, December 14, 2009, p. 20.
25. Rik Pieters and Michel Wedel, “Attention Capture and
Transfer in Advertising: Brand, Pictorial, and Text-Size
Effects,” Journal of Marketing 68 (April 2004), pp. 36–50.
26. Herbert C. Kelman and Carl I. Hovland, “Reinstatement
of the Communication in Delayed Measurement of
Opinion Change,” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 48 (July 1953), pp. 327–35.
27. David J. Moore, John C. Mowen, and Richard
Reardon, “Multiple Sources in Advertising Appeals:
When Product Endorsers Are Paid by the Advertising
Sponsor,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science 13 (Summer 1994), pp. 234–43.
28. C. E. Osgood and P. H. Tannenbaum, “The Principles
of Congruity in the Prediction of Attitude Change,”
Psychological Review 62 (January 1955), pp. 42–55.
29. Brian Morrissey, “Traditional Ads Yield Social Traction,”
Adweek, May 16, 2010.
30. “Face-to-Face Report,” American Business Media,
January 2010; “John Deere Face-to-Face Campaign
Races Past Competition,” Special Advertising Section
to Adweek and Brandweek, October 14, 2009; Gyro
HSR, www.gyrohsr.com.
31. Suzanne Vranca, “New to the TV Lineup: A Flat-Panel
Teaser LG Uses Ruse of Show to Market Its Screen,”
Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2008.
32. Adapted from G. Maxwell Ule, “A Media Plan for
‘Sputnik’ Cigarettes,” How to Plan Media Strategy
(American Association of Advertising Agencies, 1957
Regional Convention), pp. 41–52.
33. Thomas C. Kinnear, Kenneth L. Bernhardt, and
Kathleen A. Krentler, Principles of Marketing, 6th ed.
(New York: HarperCollins, 1995).
34. K. Sridhar Moorthy and Scott A. Hawkins, “Advertising
Repetition and Quality Perceptions,” Journal of
Business Research 58 (March 2005), pp. 354–60;
Amna Kirmani and Akshay R. Rao, “No Pain, No Gain:
A Critical Review of the Literature on Signaling
Unobservable Product Quality,” Journal of Marketing
64 (April 2000), pp. 66–79; Amna Kirmani, “The Effect
of Perceived Advertising Costs on Brand Perceptions,”
Journal of Consumer Research 17 (September 17,
1990), pp. 160–71; Amna Kirmani and Peter Wright,
“Money Talks: Perceived Advertising Expense and

Expected Product Quality,” Journal of Consumer
Research 16 (December 1989), pp. 344–53.
35. Demetrios Vakratsas and Tim Ambler, “How
Advertising Works: What Do We Really Know?”
Journal of Marketing 63 (January 1999), pp. 26–43.
36. Levitt, Industrial Purchasing Behavior: A Study in
Communication Effects (Boston, MA: Harvard
University Division of Research, 1965).
37. “Let’s Build a Smarter Planet,” Effie Worldwide,
www.effie.org/winners/showcase/2010/; “IBM
Smarter Planet Campaign from Ogilvy & Mather
Wins Global Effie,” PRNewswire, June 9, 2010;
Jeffrey M. O’Brien, “IBM’s Grand Plan to Save the
Planet,” Fortune, April 21, 2009.
38. Prasad A. Naik and Kalyan Raman, “Understanding the
Impact of Synergy in Multimedia Communications,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (November 2003),
pp. 375–88. See also, Prasad A. Naik, Kalyan Raman,
and Russell S. Winer, “Planning Marketing-Mix
Strategies in the Presence of Interaction Effects,”
Marketing Science 24 (January 2005), pp. 25–34.
39. Scott Neslin, Sales Promotion, MSI Relevant
Knowledge Series (Cambridge, MA: Marketing
Science Institute, 2002).
40. Markus Pfeiffer and Markus Zinnbauer, “Can Old
Media Enhance New Media?” Journal of Advertising
Research (March 2010), pp. 42–49.
41. Ellen Neuborne, “Ads That Actually Sell Stuff,”
Business 2.0, June 2004, p. 78.
42. Sreedhar Madhavaram, Vishag Badrinarayanan, and
Robert E. McDonald, “Integrated Marketing
Communication (IMC) and Brand Identity as Critical
Components of Brand Equity Strategy,” Journal of
Advertising 34 (Winter 2005), pp. 69–80; Mike Reid,
Sandra Luxton, and Felix Mavondo, “The Relationship
between Integrated Marketing Communication, Market
Orientation, and Brand Orientation,” Journal of
Advertising 34 (Winter 2005), pp. 11–23.
43. Don E. Schultz and Heidi Schultz, IMC, The Next
Generation: Five Steps for Delivering Value and
Measuring Financial Returns (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2003); Don E. Shultz, Stanley I. Tannenbaum, and
Robert F. Lauterborn, Integrated Marketing
Communications: Putting It Together and Making It
Work (Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books, 1992).
44. Bruce Horovitz, “Super Bowl Marketers Go All Out to
Create Hype, Online Buzz,” USA Today, February 8,
2010.

Chapter 18
1. Dan Sewall, “Old Spice Rolls Out New Ads,”
Associated Press, July 1, 2010; Adam Tschorn, “Old
Spice Ad Connects Women to Male Brand with a
Wink,” Los Angeles Times, March 6, 2010; Mary
Elizabeth Williams, “Take That, Super Bowl,”
Salon.com, www.salon.com, February 22, 2010.
2. Paul F. Nunes and Jeffrey Merrihue, “The Continuing
Power of Mass Advertising,” Sloan Management
Review (Winter 2007), pp. 63–69.
Endnotes

E49

3. Jack Neff, “‘Broken’ Ad Model Holds Big Advantages
for P&G,” Advertising Age, March 5, 2007.
4. Russell H. Colley, Defining Advertising Goals for
Measured Advertising Results (New York: Association
of National Advertisers, 1961).
5. Wilfred Amaldoss and Chuan He, “Product Variety,
Informative Advertising, and Price Competition,”
Journal of Marketing Research 47 (February 2010),
pp. 146–56.
6. Dale Buss, “OnStar First Aid,” Brandchannel,
www.brandchannel.com, February 15, 2010; “OnStar
Expands TV Campaign Ads Based on Real-Life
Stories,” Road & Travel Magazine, November 5, 2003.
7. “Responses to Comparative Advertising,” Journal of
Consumer Research 32 (March 2006), pp. 530–40;
Dhruv Grewal, Sukumar Kavanoor, and James Barnes,
“Comparative versus Noncomparative Advertising: A
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Marketing 61 (October
1997), pp. 1–15; Randall L. Rose, Paul W. Miniard,
Michael J. Barone, Kenneth C. Manning, and Brian D.
Till, “When Persuasion Goes Undetected: The Case of
Comparative Advertising,” Journal of Marketing
Research 30 (August 1993), pp. 315–30.
8. Rajesh Chandy, Gerard J. Tellis, Debbie MacInnis, and
Pattana Thaivanich, “What to Say When: Advertising
Appeals in Evolving Markets,” Journal of Marketing
Research 38 (November 2001); Gerard J. Tellis, Rajesh
Chandy, and Pattana Thaivanich, “Decomposing the
Effects of Direct Advertising: Which Brand Works,
When, Where, and How Long?” Journal of Marketing
Research 37 (February 2000), pp. 32–46; Peter J.
Danaher, André Bonfrer, and Sanjay Dhar, “The Effect
of Competitive Advertising,” Journal of Marketing
Research 45 (April 2008), pp. 211–25; Donald E.
Schultz, Dennis Martin, and William P. Brown, Strategic
Advertising Campaigns (Chicago: Crain Books, 1984),
pp. 192–97.
9. Demetrios Vakratsas, Fred M. Feinberg, Frank M. Bass,
and Gurumurthy Kalyanaram, “The Shape of
Advertising Response Functions Revisited: A Model of
Dynamic Probabilistic Thresholds,” Marketing Science
23 (Winter 2004), pp. 109–19; for an excellent review,
see Greg Allenby and Dominique Hanssens,
“Advertising Response,” Marketing Science Institute,
Special Report, No. 05-200, 2005.
10. Leonard M. Lodish, Magid Abraham, Stuart
Kalmenson, Jeanne Livelsberger, Beth Lubetkin, Bruce
Richardson, and Mary Ellen Stevens, “How T.V.
Advertising Works: A Meta-Analysis of 389 Real-World
Split Cable T.V. Advertising Experiments,” Journal of
Marketing Research 32 (May 1995), pp. 125–39.
11. Greg Allenby and Dominique Hanssens, “Advertising
Response,” Marketing Science Institute, Special
Report, No. 05-200, 2005; Jack Neff, “TV Doesn’t Sell
Package Goods,” Advertising Age, May 24, 2004,
pp. 1, 30.
12. Cleve Langton, “Searching for the Holy Global Ad
Grail,” Brandweek, June 5, 2006, p. 16.

E50

Endnotes

13. Jeff Manning, “Got Milk?” Associations Now, July 1,
2006, pp. 56–61; Jeff Manning and Kevin Lane Keller,
“Making Advertising Work: How Got Milk? Marketing
Stopped a 20-Year Sales Decline,” Marketing
Management (January–February 2003); Jeff Manning,
Got Milk? The Book (New York: Prima Lifestyles, 1999).
14. Eric Pfanner, “When Consumers Help, Ads Are Free,”
New York Times, June 22, 2009, p. B6; Elisabeth
Sullivan, “H. J. Heinz: Consumers Sit in the Director’s
Chair for Viral Effort,” Marketing News, February 10,
2008, p. 10; Louise Story, “The High Price of Creating
Free Ads,” New York Times, May 26, 2007; Laura
Petrecca, “Madison Avenue Wants You! (or at Least
Your Videos),” USA Today, June 21, 2007; Eric Pfanner,
“Leave It to the Professionals? Hey, Let Consumers
Make Their Own Ads,” New York Times, August 4,
2006.
15. Ruth Lamperd, “Vegemite Product Renamed Vegemite
Cheesybite after iSnack 2.0 was Dumped,” Herald
Sun, October 7, 2009; “Follies,” Advertising Age,
December 14, 2009, p. 20.
16. Daniel P. Amos, “How I Did It: Aflac’s CEO Explains
How He Fell for the Duck,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 2010; Stuart Elliott, “Not Daffy or
Donald, But Still Aflac’s Rising Star,” New York Times,
April 22, 2009; Kathleen Sampey, “Q&A: Aflac CMO
Herbert,” Adweek, October 16, 2006; Ron Insana,
“Insurance Business Just Ducky for AFLAC,” USA
Today, July 5, 2005; Chad Bray, “If It Quacks, It May
Be an Insurance Ad,” Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2003;
Stuart Elliott, “Why a Duck? Because It Sells
Insurance,” New York Times, June 24, 2002.
17. “Scarborough Writes a Refreshing Headline for the
Newspaper Industry: Three-Quarters of Adults Are
Reading Newspapers, in Print or Online,” Scarborough
Research, www.scarborough.com; Joseph Plambeck,
“Newspaper Circulation Falls Nearly 9%,” New York
Times, April 26, 2010.
18. Jeremy Mullman, “Breaking with Bottle Fires Up
Absolut Sales,” Advertising Age, February 18, 2008;
Andrew McMains, “‘Absolut World’ Debuts,” Adweek,
April 27, 2007; Stuart Elliott, “In an ‘Absolut World,’ a
Vodka Could Use the Same Ads for More than 25
Years,” New York Times, April 27, 2007; Theresa
Howard, “Absolut Gets into Spirit of Name Play with
New Ads,” USA Today, January 16, 2006.
19. “The Infinite Dial 2009,” Arbitron, April 2009.
20. “Motel 6 Ad Earns Grand Prize at Radio Mercury
Awards,” Motel 6, www.motel6.com, July 1, 2009;
“Motel 6 Receives Hermes and Silver GALAXY Awards
for 2002 Advertising Campaigns,” Business Editors/
Travel Writers, Business Wire, November 22, 2002.
21. Kim Bartel Sheehan, Controversies in Contemporary
Advertising (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2003).
22. Sarah Hills, “McNeil and Sugar Association Settle
Splenda Dispute,” Food Navigator-usa.com,
www.foodnavigator-usa.com, November 18, 2008;
James P. Miller, “Bitter Sweets Fight Ended,” Chicago

Tribune, May 12, 2007; Avery Johnson, “How Sweet It
Isn’t: Maker of Equal Says Ads for J&J’s Splenda
Misled; Chemistry Lesson for Jurors,” Wall Street
Journal, April 6, 2007. For a discussion of the possible
role of corrective advertising, see Peter Darke,
Laurence Ashworth, and Robin J. B. Ritchie, “Damage
from Corrective Advertising: Causes and Cures,”
Journal of Marketing 72 (November 2008), pp. 81–97.
23. For further reading, see Dorothy Cohen, Legal Issues in
Marketing Decision Making (Cincinnati, OH: SouthWestern, 1995).
24. Jim Kavanagh, “Ad Council Gets Creative to Get Your
Attention,” CNN, www.cnn.com, September 2, 2009.
25. Schultz et al., Strategic Advertising Campaigns
(Chicago: NTC/Contemporary Publishing Company,
September 1994), p. 340.
26. Prashant Malaviya, “The Moderating Influence of
Advertising Context on Ad Repetition Effects: The Role
of Amount and Type of Elaboration,” Journal of
Consumer Research 34 (June 2007), pp. 32–40.
27. Elena Malykhina, “GEICO Poses ‘Rhetorical
Questions,’” Brandweek, December 28, 2009; Adam
Armbruster, “GEICO Takes Varied Roads to
Consumers,” Television Week, March 12, 2007, p. 10;
Rob Walker, “Pop-Culture Evolution,” New York Times
Magazine, April 15, 2007; Yahoo Finance,
http://biz.yahoo.com/ic/10/10616.html.
28. Sam Jaffe, “Easy Riders,” American Demographics,
March 2004, pp. 20–23.
29. Max Chafkin, “Ads and Atmospherics,” Inc., February
2007.
30. Stephanie Clifford, “Billboards That Look Back,” New
York Times, May 31, 2008.
31. Abbey Klaassen and Andrew Hampp, “Inside
Outdoor’s Digital Makeover,” Advertising Age:
Creativity, June 14, 2010, p. 5.
32. Abbey Klaassen and Andrew Hampp, “Inside
Outdoor’s Digital Makeover,” Advertising Age:
Creativity, June 14, 2010, p. 5.
33. Jon Fine, “Where Are Advertisers? At the Movies,”
BusinessWeek, May 25, 2009, pp. 65–66; “Advertisers
Go Outside to Play,” AdweekMedia, March 9, 2009,
p. 1; Zack O’Malley Greenburg, “Take Your Brand for a
Ride,” Forbes, March 2, 2009, p. 67.
34. Jeff Pelline, “New Commercial Twist in Corporate
Restrooms,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 6, 1986.
35. Brian Steinberg and Suzanne Vranica, “Prime-Time
TV’s New Guest Stars: Products,” Wall Street Journal,
January 13, 2004; Michael A. Wiles and Anna
Danielova, “The Worth of Product Placement in
Successful Films: An Event Study Analysis,” Journal of
Marketing 73 (July 2009), pp. 44–63; Siva K.
Balasubramanian, James Karrh, and Hemant
Patwardhan, “Audience Response to Product
Placements: An Integrative Framework and Future
Research Agenda,” Journal of Advertising 35 (2006),
pp. 115–41; Cristel A. Russell and Barbara Stern,

“Consumers, Characters, and Products: A Balance
Model of Sitcom Product Placement Effects,” Journal
of Advertising 35 (2006), pp.7–18; Cristel A. Russell
and Michael Belch, “A Managerial Investigation into the
Product Placement Industry,” Journal of Advertising
Research 45 (2005), pp. 73–92.
36. Stephanie Clifford, “Product Placements Acquire a Life
of Their Own on Shows,” New York Times, July 14,
2008; “FCC Opens Inquiry into Stealthy TV Product
Placement,” Associated Press, June 26, 2008; Chris
Reidy, “Staples Gets an Office Encore,” Boston Globe,
November 4, 2006; James L. Johnston, “Branded
Entertainment: The Old Is New Again and More
Complicated Than Ever,” Journal of Sponsorship 2
(February 2009), pp. 170–75.
37. Popai, www.popai.com, accessed August 22, 2010.
38. Ram Bezawada, S. Balachander, P. K. Kannan, and
Venkatesh Shankar, “Cross-Category Effects of Aisle
and Display Placements: A Spatial Modeling Approach
and Insights,” Journal of Marketing 73 (May 2009),
pp. 99–117; Pierre Chandon, J. Wesley Hutchinson,
Eric T. Bradlow, and Scott H. Young, “Does In-Store
Marketing Work? Effects of the Number and Position of
Shelf Facings on Brand Attention and Evaluation at the
Point of Purchase,” Journal of Marketing 73 (November
2009), pp. 1–17.
39. Bill Yackey, “Walmart Reveals 18-Month Results for
SMART Network,” Digital Signage Today, February 23,
2010; Mark Friedman, “Walmart’s New In-Store Ads
Turning Heads,” Arkansas Business, September 22,
2008; Laura Petrecca, “Wal-Mart TV Sells Marketers
Flexibility,” USA Today, March 29, 2007.
40. Daniel Terdiman, “McDonald’s Is Lead Sponsor of
Olympics-Themed ARG, ‘The Lost Ring,’” CNET News,
March 6, 2008; Stephanie Clifford, “An Online Game
So Mysterious Its Famous Sponsor Is Hidden,” New
York Times, April 1, 2008; Ben Arnoldy, “Wisdom of the
Crowd Triumphs in Alternate Reality Games,” Christian
Science Monitor, March 26, 2008.
41. Brian Steinberg, “‘Sunday Night Football’ Remains
Costliest TV Show,” Advertising Age, October 26,
2009.
42. “4A’s Television Production Cost Survey,” 4A’s,
www.aaaa.org, December 15, 2009.
43. For more on other media context effects, see Michael A.
Kamins, Lawrence J. Marks, and Deborah Skinner,
“Television Commercial Evaluation in the Context of
Program-Induced Mood: Congruency versus
Consistency Effects,” Journal of Advertising, June 1991,
pp. 1–14; see also, Jing Wang and Bobby J. Calder,
“Media Transportation and Advertising,” Journal of
Consumer Research 33 (September 2006), pp. 151–62.
44. Kenneth R. Lord, Myung-Soo Lee, and Paul L. Sauer,
“Program Context Antecedents of Attitude toward
Radio Commercials,” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 13 (Winter 1994), pp. 3–15;
Kenneth R. Lord and Robert E. Burnkrant, “Attention
versus Distraction: The Interactive Effect of Program

Endnotes

E51

Involvement and Attentional Devices on Commercial
Processing,” Journal of Advertising (March 1993),
pp. 47–60.
45. Roland T. Rust, Advertising Media Models: A Practical
Guide (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1986).
46. Hani I. Mesak, “An Aggregate Advertising Pulsing
Model with Wearout Effects,” Marketing Science 11
(Summer 1992), pp. 310–26; Fred M. Feinberg,
“Pulsing Policies for Aggregate Advertising Models,”
Marketing Science 11 (Summer 1992), pp. 221–34.
47. David B. Montgomery and Alvin J. Silk, “Estimating
Dynamic Effects of Market Communications
Expenditures,” Management Science (June 1972),
pp. 485–501; Kristian S. Palda, The Measurement of
Cumulative Advertising Effect (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1964), p. 87.
48. Gerard J. Tellis, Rajesh K. Chandy, and Pattana
Thaivanich, “Which Ad Works, When, Where, and How
Often? Modeling the Effects of Direct Television
Advertising,” Journal of Marketing Research 37
(February 2000), pp. 32–46; Ajay Kalra and Ronald C.
Goodstein, “The Impact of Advertising Positioning
Strategies on Consumer Price Sensitivity,” Journal of
Marketing Research (May 1998), pp. 210–24; Anil Kaul
and Dick R. Wittink, “Empirical Generalizations about
the Impact of Advertising on Price Sensitivity and
Price,” Marketing Science 14 (Summer 1995), pp.
G151–60; David Walker and Tony M. Dubitsky, “Why
Liking Matters,” Journal of Advertising Research,
May–June 1994, pp. 9–18; Abhilasha Mehta, “How
Advertising Response Modeling (ARM) Can Increase
Ad Effectiveness,” Journal of Advertising Research
(May–June 1994), pp. 62–74; John Deighton, Caroline
Henderson, and Scott Neslin, “The Effects of
Advertising on Brand Switching and Repeat
Purchasing,” Journal of Marketing Research 31
(February 1994), pp. 28–43; Karin Holstius, “Sales
Response to Advertising,” International Journal of
Advertising 9 (September 1990), pp. 38–56.
49. Nigel Hollis, “The Future of Tracking Studies,” Admap,
October 2004, pp. 151–53.
50. From Robert C. Blattberg and Scott A. Neslin, Sales
Promotion: Concepts, Methods, and Strategies (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990). This text
provides a detailed, analytical treatment of sales
promotion. An comprehensive review of academic
work on sales promotions can be found in Scott
Neslin, “Sales Promotion,” Bart Weitz and Robin
Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage,
2002), pp. 310–38.
51. Kusum Ailawadi, Karen Gedenk, and Scott A. Neslin,
“Heterogeneity and Purchase Event Feedback in
Choice Models: An Empirical Analysis with Implications
for Model Building,” International Journal of Research
in Marketing 16 (September 1999), pp. 177–98. See
also, Kusum L. Ailawadi, Karen Gedenk, Christian
Lutzky, and Scott A. Neslin, “Decomposition of the
Sales Impact of Promotion-Induced Stockpiling,”
Journal of Marketing Research 44 (August 2007); Eric
E52

Endnotes

T. Anderson and Duncan Simester, “The Long-Run
Effects of Promotion Depth on New versus
Established Customers: Three Field Studies,”
Marketing Science 23 (Winter 2004), pp. 4–20; Luc
Wathieu, A. V. Muthukrishnan, and Bart J.
Bronnenberg. “The Asymmetric Effect of Discount
Retraction on Subsequent Choice,” Journal of
Consumer Research 31 (December 2004), pp. 652–65;
Praveen Kopalle, Carl F. Mela, and Lawrence Marsh,
“The Dynamic Effect of Discounting on Sales:
Empirical Analysis and Normative Pricing Implications,”
Marketing Science 18 (Summer 1999), pp. 317–32.
52. Harald J. Van Heerde, Sachin Gupta, and Dick Wittink,
“Is 75% of the Sales Promotion Bump Due to Brand
Switching? No, Only 33% Is,” Journal of Marketing
Research 40 (November 2003), pp. 481–91; Harald J.
Van Heerde, Peter S. H. Leeflang, and Dick R. Wittink,
“The Estimation of Pre- and Postpromotion Dips with
Store-Level Scanner Data,” Journal of Marketing
Research 37 (August 2000), pp. 383–95.
53. For a good summary of the research on whether
promotion erodes the consumer franchise of leading
brands, see Blattberg and Neslin, “Sales Promotion:
The Long and Short of It,”Marketing Letters 1
(December 2004); See also, “Stephanie Rosenbloom,
“In Recession, Even the Holdouts Use Coupons,” New
York Times, September 24, 2009. For a related topic,
see Michael J. Barone and Tirthankar Roy, “Does
Exclusivity Pay Off? Exclusive Price Promotions and
Consumer Response,” Journal of Marketing 74
(March 2010), pp. 121–32.
54. Robert George Brown, “Sales Response to Promotions
and Advertising,” Journal of Advertising Research
(August 1974), pp. 36–37. Also see Kamel Jedidi, Carl
F. Mela, and Sunil Gupta, “Managing Advertising and
Promotion for Long-Run Profitability,” Marketing
Science 18 (Winter 1999), pp. 1–22; Carl F. Mela, Sunil
Gupta, and Donald R. Lehmann, “The Long-Term
Impact of Promotion and Advertising on Consumer
Brand Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research 34
(May 1997), pp. 248–61; Purushottam Papatla and
Lakshman Krishnamurti, “Measuring the Dynamic
Effects of Promotions on Brand Choice,” Journal
of Marketing Research 33 (February 1996),
pp. 20–35.
55. “2010 REGGIE Awards Shopper Marketing: P&G
Gain—Project Gainiac,” Promotion Marketing
Association, www.pmalink.org.
56. Magid M. Abraham and Leonard M. Lodish, “Getting
the Most out of Advertising and Promotion,” Harvard
Business Review, May–June 1990, pp. 50–60. See
also, Shuba Srinivasan, Koen Pauwels, Dominique
Hanssens, and Marnik Dekimpe, “Do Promotions
Benefit Manufacturers, Retailers, or Both?”
Management Science 50 (May 2004), pp. 617–29.
57. Leonard M. Lodish, Magid Abraham, Stuart
Kalmenson, Jeanne Livelsberger, Beth Lubetkin, Bruce
Richardson, and Mary Ellen Stevens, “How T.V.
Advertising Works: A Meta-Analysis of 389 Real World

Split Cable T.V. Advertising Experiments,” Journal of
Marketing Research 32 (May 1995), pp. 125–39.
58. Rebecca J. Slotegraaf and Koen Pauwels, “The Impact
of Brand Equity Innovation on the Long-Term
Effectiveness of Promotions,” Journal of Marketing
Research 45 (June 2008), pp. 293–306.
59. For a model for setting sales promotions objectives,
see David B. Jones, “Setting Promotional Goals: A
Communications Relationship Model,” Journal of
Consumer Marketing 11 (1994), pp. 38–49.
60. Kusum L. Ailawadi, Bari A. Harlam, Jacques Cesar, and
David Trounce, “Promotion Profitability for a Retailer:
The Role of Promotion, Brand, Category, and Store
Characteristics,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(November 2006), pp. 518–36.
61. Emily Bryson York and Natalie Zmuda, “Sampling:
The New Mass Media,” Advertising Age, May 12, 2008,
pp. 3, 56.
62. Sarah Skidmore, “Coupons Evolve for the Digital Age,”
Associated Press, August 30, 2009; “20 Most Popular
Comparison Shopping Websites,” eBizMBA,
www.ebizmba.com, June 2010.
63. Miguel Gomez, Vithala Rao, and Edward McLaughlin,
“Empirical Analysis of Budget and Allocation of Trade
Promotions in the U.S. Supermarket Industry,” Journal
of Marketing Research 44 (August 2007); Norris Bruce,
Preyas S. Desai, and Richard Staelin, “The Better They
Are, the More They Give: Trade Promotions of
Consumer Durables,” Journal of Marketing Research
42 (February 2005), pp. 54–66.
64. Kusum L. Ailawadi and Bari Harlam, “An Empirical
Analysis of the Determinants of Retail Margins: The
Role of Store Brand Share,” Journal of Marketing 68
(January 2004), pp. 147–66; Kusum L. Ailawadi, “The
Retail Power-Performance Conundrum: What Have We
Learned?” Journal of Retailing 77 (Fall 2001),
pp. 299–318; Paul W. Farris and Kusum L. Ailawadi,
“Retail Power: Monster or Mouse?” Journal of Retailing
(Winter 1992), pp. 351–69; Koen Pauwels, “How
Retailer and Competitor Decisions Drive the Long-Term
Effectiveness of Manufacturer Promotions,” Journal of
Retailing 83 (2007), pp. 364–90.
65. James Bandler, “The Shadowy Business of Diversion,”
Fortune, August 17, 2009, p. 65; Rajiv Lal, John Little,
and J. M. Vilas-Boas, “A Theory of Forward Buying,
Merchandising, and Trade Deals,” Marketing Science
15 (Winter 1996), pp. 21–37.
66. IBIS World USA, www.ibisworld.com; Noah Lim,
Michael J. Ahearne, and Sung H. Ham, “Designing
Sales Contests: Does the Prize Structure Matter?”
Journal of Marketing Research 46 (June 2009),
pp. 356–71.
67. “Kraft’s Oreo Takes Super Reggie,” Promo, March 12,
2009; Elaine Wong, “How Kraft’s Double Stuf Oreo
Launch Trumped Expectations,” Brandweek, August
31, 2009; “Oreo Double Stuf Racing League (DSRL),”
Promotion Marketing Association, www.pmalink.org.
68. Kurt H. Schaffir and H. George Trenten, Marketing
Information Systems (New York: AMACOM, 1973), p. 81.

69. Joe A. Dodson, Alice M. Tybout, and Brian Sternthal,
“Impact of Deals and Deal Retraction on Brand
Switching,” Journal of Marketing Research 15
(February 1978), pp. 72–81.
70. IEG Sponsorship Report, as quoted in “Sponsorship
Spending Revised, Growth Cut in Half: IEG,” Promo,
June 18, 2009.
71. Philip Kotler, “Atmospherics as a Marketing Tool,”
Journal of Retailing (Winter 1973–1974), pp. 48–64.
72. Kathleen Kerwin, “When the Factory Is a Theme Park,”
BusinessWeek, May 3, 2004, p. 94; Vanessa O’Connell,
“‘You-Are-There’ Advertising,” Wall Street Journal,
August 5, 2002.
73. Jeff Borden, “Tornado: Experiential Marketing Takes
the Industry by Storm in 2008,” Marketing News,
January 15, 2008, pp. 23–26.
74. Michael Schmelling, “Creative Mischief,” Fast
Company, November 2008, pp. 134–38; “GE Profile
Inflatable Product Replicas Hit Times Square,”
Landmark Creations, www.landmarkcreations.com;
Laurie Sullivan, “GE Ads Show How to Lighten the
Laundry Load,” Marketing Daily, August 27, 2008.
75. “Personal Care Marketers: Who Does What,” IEG
Sponsorship Report, April 16, 2007, p. 4.
76. Bettina Cornwell, Michael S. Humphreys, Angela M.
Maguire, Clinton S. Weeks, and Cassandra Tellegen,
“Sponsorship-Linked Marketing: The Role of
Articulation in Memory,” Journal of Consumer
Research 33 (December 2006), pp. 312–21.
77. Hilary Cassidy, “So You Want to Be an Olympic
Sponsor?” Brandweek, November 7, 2005,
pp. 24–28.
78. “Brands Suit Up for ‘Iron Man 2,’” Adweek, May 14,
2010.
79. “BB&T Continues Sponsorship with Clint Bowyer,
Richard Childress Racing,” SceneDaily, January 14,
2010; “BB&T Puts Name on New Winston-Salem
Ballpark,” Winston-Salem Journal, February 24, 2010;
“Bank’s New Department, Deals Reflect Elevated
Sponsorship Status,” IEG Sponsorship Report, April
16, 2007, pp. 1, 8.
80. The Association of National Advertisers has a useful
source: Event Marketing: A Management Guide, which
is available at www.ana.net/bookstore.
81. T. Bettina Cornwell, Clinton S. Weeks, and Donald
P. Roy, “Sponsorship-Linked Marketing: Opening the
Black Box,” Journal of Advertising 34 (Summer
2005).
82. Constantine von Hoffman, “Buying Up the Bleachers,”
Brandweek, February 19, 2007, pp. 18–21.
83. William L. Shankin and John Kuzma, “Buying That
Sporting Image,” Marketing Management (Spring
1992), pp. 65.
84. B. Joseph Pine and James H. Gilmore, The Experience
Economy: Work Is Theatre and Every Business a Stage
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
85. “2006 Experiential Marketing Study,” Jack Morton,
www.jackmorton.com.
Endnotes

E53

86. “Do We Have a Story for You!” Economist, January 21,
2006, pp. 57–58; Al Ries and Laura Ries, The Fall of
Advertising and the Rise of PR (New York:
HarperCollins, 2002).
87. “PRWeek Campaign of the Year,” PRWeek,
March 5, 2009; “Man Lives in IKEA,” Ketchum,
www.ketchum.com; “Man Lives in NYC IKEA Store,”
Associated Press, January 8, 2008.
88. “Ketchum and Dreyer’s Win PRWeek Campaign of
the Year Award,” PRNewswire, March 12, 2010;
“Dreyer’s Slow Churned Dishes Out a Taste of
Recovery with the Debut of ‘Red, White and No More
Blues’ Flavor,” PRNewswire, June 23, 2009; “Beat
the Blues with a Taste of Recovery,” CLIO 2010,
www.clioawards.com.
89. Arthur M. Merims, “Marketing’s Stepchild: Product
Publicity,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 1972, pp. 111–12. Also see
Katherine D. Paine, “There Is a Method for Measuring
PR,” Marketing News, November 6, 1987, p. 5.

Chapter 19
1. Elaine Wong, “Pepsi’s Refresh Project Drives Social
Buzz,” Brandweek, June 9, 2010; Stuart Elliott, “Pepsi
Invites the Public to Do Good,” New York Times,
February 1, 2010; Suzanne Vranica, “Pepsi Benches Its
Drinks,” Wall Street Journal, December 17, 2009.
2. The terms direct-order marketing and directrelationship marketing were suggested as subsets of
direct marketing by Stan Rapp and Tom Collins in The
Great Marketing Turnaround (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1990).
3. Ran Kivetz and Itamar Simonson, “The Idiosyncratic
Fit Heuristic: Effort Advantage as a Determinant of
Consumer Response to Loyalty Programs,” Journal
of Marketing Research 40 (November 2003),
pp. 454–67; Ran Kivetz and Itamar Simonson,
“Earning the Right to Indulge: Effort as a Determinant
of Customer Preferences toward Frequency Program
Rewards,” Journal of Marketing Research 39 (May
2002), pp. 155–70.
4. www.the-dma.org homepage
5. L.L. Bean, www.llbean.com.
6. Stan Rapp and Thomas L. Collins, Maximarketing (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1987).
7. www.dma-echo.org; www.yellowtreehouse.co.nz;
www.ameawards.com.
8. “DMA Releases 2010 Response Rate Trend Report,”
Direct Marketing Association, www.the-dma.org,
June 15, 2010.
9. Bob Stone and Ron Jacobs, Successful Direct
Marketing Methods, 8th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2007).
10. Edward L. Nash, Direct Marketing: Strategy, Planning,
Execution, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000).
11. The average customer longevity (N) is related to the
customer retention rate (CR). Suppose the company
retains 80 percent of its customers each year. Then the
E54

Endnotes

average customer longevity is given by:
N = 1/(1 – CR) = 1/.2 = 5 years.
12. “MCM 100,” Multi Channel Merchant,
www.multichannelmerchant.com, July 2009.
13. “Industry Overview: Internet and Catalog Retailers,”
Hoovers, www.hoovers.com, accessed August 22, 2010.
14. “Biennial Report to Congress: Pursuant to the Do Not
Call Registry Fee Extension Act of 2007,” Federal
Trade Commission, www.ftc.gov, December 2009.
15. Charles Duhigg, “Telemarketing Thieves Sharpen Their
Focus on the Elderly,” New York Times, May 20, 2007.
16. Tony Case, “Growing Up,” Interactive Quarterly, April
19, 2004, pp. 32–34.
17. For example, see André Bonfrer and Xavier Drèze,
“Real-Time Evaluation of E-mail Campaign
Performance,” Marketing Science 28 (March–April
2009), pp. 251–63.
18. Kenneth C. Wilbur and Yi Zhu, “Click Fraud,” Marketing
Science 28 (March–April 2009), pp. 293–308.
19. Ellen Byron, “Estée Lauder Tests Web-Ad Waters,” Wall
Street Journal, September 19, 2006.
20. Asim Ansari and Carl F. Mela, “E-Customization,”
Journal of Marketing Research 40 (May 2003),
pp. 131–45.
21. Daniel Michaels and J. Lynn Lunsford, “Ad-Sales Woes
Likely to Continue,” Wall Street Journal, December 4,
2006; Jack Neff, “Axe Cuts Past Competitors, Claims
Market Lead,” Advertising Age, May 14, 2006; Byron
Acohido, “Rich Media Enriching PC Ads,” USA Today,
February 25, 2004.
22. Stuart Elliott, “Letting Consumers Control Marketing:
Priceless,” New York Times, October 9, 2006; Elizabeth
Holmes, “On MySpace, Millions of Users Make
‘Friends’ with Ads,” Wall Street Journal, August 7,
2006; “2009 Gold Effie Winner: ‘Whopper Freakout,’”
Effie Awards, Effie Worldwide, www.effie.org.
23. Allen P. Adamson, Brand Digital (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008).
24. John R. Hauser, Glen L. Urban, Guilherme Liberali, and
Michael Braun, “Website Morphing,” Marketing
Science 28 (March–April 2009), pp. 202–23; Peter
J. Danaher, Guy W. Mullarkey, and Skander Essegaier,
“Factors Affecting Web Site Visit Duration: A CrossDomain Analysis,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(May 2006), pp. 182–94; Philip Kotler, According to
Kotler (New York: American Management Association,
2005).
25. Jeffrey F. Rayport and Bernard J. Jaworski, e-commerce
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), p. 116.
26. Bob Tedeschi, “E-Commerce Report,” New York
Times, June 24, 2002.
27. Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp and Inge Geyskens,
“How Country Characteristics Affect the Perceived
Value of Web Sites,” Journal of Marketing 70 (July
2006), pp. 136–50.
28. Jessi Hempel, “The Online Numbers Game,” Fortune,
September 3, 2007, p. 18.

29. Julia Angwin and Tom McGinty, “Sites Feed Personal
Details to New Tracking Industry,” Wall Street Journal,
July 31, 2010.
30. eMarketer, www.emarketer.com, May 2010.
31. Emily Steel, “Marketers Take Search Ads Beyond
Search Engines,” Wall Street Journal, January 19, 2009.
32. Paula Andruss, “How to Win the Bidding Wars,”
Marketing News, April 1, 2008, p. 28; “Jefferson
Graham, “To Drive Traffic to Your Site, You Need to
Give Good Directions,” USA Today, June 23, 2008.
33. Peter J. Danaher, Janghyuk Lee, and Laoucine
Kerbache, “Optimal Internet Media Selection,”
Marketing Science 29 (March–April 2010), pp. 336–47;
Puneet Manchanda, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Khim Yong
Goh, and Pradeep K. Chintagunta, “The Effects of
Banner Advertising on Internet Purchasing,” Journal of
Marketing Research 43 (February 2006), pp. 98–108.
34. Brian Morrissey, “Big Money Bet on Display Ad Tech,”
Adweek, August 1, 2010; Brian Morrissey, “Beefing Up
Banner Ads,” Adweek NEXT, February 15, 2010,
pp. 10–11; Robert D. Hof, “The Squeeze on Online
Ads,” BusinessWeek, March 2, 2009, pp. 48–49; Emily
Steel, “Web Sites Debate Best Values for Advertising
Dollars,” Wall Street Journal, August 13, 2009, p. B7.
35. Elisabeth Lewin, “Podcast Audience Growing Faster
Than Podcast Advertising,” Podcasting News,
www.podcastingnews.com, May 13, 2009.
36. Natalie Zmuda, “How E-mail Became a DirectMarketing Rock Star in Recession,” Advertising Age,
May 11, 2009, p. 27.
37. Piet Levy, “An E-motional Call to Action,” Marketing
News, April 30, 2010, p. 8.
38. Roger Cheng, “Mobile Ads Make Gains, But Pace
Slows Sharply,” Wall Street Journal, April 7, 2009;
Mark Walsh, “Gartner: Mobile Advertising to Grow 74
percent In 2009,” MediaPost, August 31, 2009; Amol
Sharma, “Companies Vie for Ad Dollars on Mobile
Web,” Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2007; “Mobile
Advertising: The Next Big Thing,” Economist, October
7, 2007, pp. 73–74.
39. Giselle Tsirulnik, “Bank of America Uses Mobile
Banners to Drive App Downloads,” Mobile Marketer,
September 4, 2009; Rita Chang, “Consumer Control
Brings Brand Loyalty,” Advertising Age, March 30,
2009, p. 26; Dan Butcher, “Bank of America Campaign
Targets Students for Mobile Banking,” Mobile
Marketer, August 28, 2008; Mickey Alam Khan, “Bank
of America Surpasses 1M Mobile Banking Customers,”
Mobile Marketer, June 13, 2008.
40. Brian Morrissey, “2009 Really Isn’t the Year of Mobile.
Here’s Why,” Brandweek, November 16, 2009, p. 6;
Douglas MacMillan, Peter Burrows, and Spencer E.
Ante, “The App Economy,” BusinessWeek, November 2,
2009, pp. 44–49.
41. “VW Set for Launch in 8 Months,” WorldCarFans.com,
www.worldcarfans.com, March 20, 2007; Eleftheria
Parpis, “Volkswagen’s Public Polling Pays Off,”
Adweek, May 19, 2008; Andrew Grill, “Volkswagen

Tiguan Mobile Advertising Case Study,” London
Calling, www.londoncalling.mobi, May 20, 2009.
42. Peter DaSilva, “Cellphone in New Role: Loyalty Card,”
New York Times, May 31, 2010.
43. Diana Ransom, “When the Customer Is in the
Neighborhood,” Wall Street Journal, May 17, 2010.
44. Don Clark and Nick Wingfield, “Intel, Microsoft Offer
Smart Sign Technology,” Wall Street Journal,
January 12, 2010; Andrew Lavallee, “Unilever to Test
Mobile Coupons in Trial at Supermarket, Cellphones
Will Be the Medium for Discount Offers,” Wall Street
Journal, May 29, 2009; Bob Tedeschi, “Phone Smart
Cents-Off Coupons and Other Special Deals, via
Your Cellphone,” New York Times, December 17,
2008.
45. Piet Levy, “Set Your Sites on Mobile,” Marketing News,
April 30, 2010, p.6; Tom Lowry, “Pandora: Unleashing
Mobile-Phone Ads,” BusinessWeek, June 1, 2009,
pp. 52–53.
46. Elisabeth Sullivan, “The Tao of Mobile Marketing,”
Marketing News, April 30, 2010, pp. 16–20.
47. Loretta Chao, “Cell Phone Ads Are Easier Pitch in
China Interactive Campaigns,” Wall Street Journal,
January 4, 2007.
48. Louise Story, “What We Talk About When We Talk
About Brands,” New York Times, November 24, 2006.
49. Robert V. Kozinets, Kristine de Valck, Andrea C.
Wojnicki, and Sarah J. S. Wilner, “Networked
Narratives: Understanding Word-of-Mouth Marketing in
Online Communities,” Journal of Marketing 74 (March
2010), pp. 71–89; David Godes and Dina Mayzlin,
“Firm-Created Word-of-Mouth Communication:
Evidence from a Field Test,” Marketing Science 28
(July–August 2009), pp. 721–39.
50. Jon Swartz, “Small Firms Dive Into Social Media,” USA
Today, July 22, 2010, p. 3B.
51. Reena Jane, “How Intuit Makes a Social Network Pay,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, July 2, 2009; Justin Smith,
“Intuit’s ‘Super Status Contest’ Aims for Product
Placement in Facebook Status Updates,” Inside
Facebook, www.insidefacebook.com, January 29,
2009; Christen Wegner, “How Intuit Stays Relevant
Using Social Media,” KyleLacey.com, www.kylelacy.
com, March 3, 2010; Jon Swartz, “More Marketers Sign
on to Social Media,” USA Today, August 28, 2009, p. 1B.
52. Effie Awards, www.effie.org/downloads/2009_winners_
list.pdf.
53. Heather Green, “It Takes a Web Village,” BusinessWeek,
September 4, 2006, p. 66; Paul Dwyer, Measuring the
Value of Word of Mouth and Its Impact in Consumer
Communities, MSI Report No. 06-118, Marketing
Science Institute, Cambridge, MA.; Kelly K. Spors,
“The Customer Knows Best,” Wall Street Journal,
July 13, 2009, p. R5.
54. Claire Cain Miller, “The Sweet Spot,” Forbes, April 23,
2007, p. 41.
55. For an academic discussion of chat rooms,
recommendation sites, and customer review sections
Endnotes

E55

online, see Dina Mayzlin, “Promotional Chat on the
Internet,” Marketing Science 25 (March–April 2006),
pp. 155–63; and Judith Chevalier and Dina Mayzlin,
“The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book
Reviews,” Journal of Marketing Research 43 (August
2006), pp. 345–54.
56. Stephen Baker, “Looking for a Blog in a Haystack,”
BusinessWeek, July 25, 2006, p. 38.
57. Heather Green, “The Big Shots of Blogdom,”
BusinessWeek, May 7, 2007; TreeHugger,
www.treehugger.com/about.
58. Kim Hart, “Angry Customers Use Web to Shame
Firms,” Washington Post, July 5, 2006.
59. For a thorough review of relevant academic literature,
see Christophe Van Den Bulte and Stefan Wuyts,
Social Networks and Marketing (Marketing Science
Institute Relevant Knowledge Series, Cambridge, MA,
2007), and for some practical considerations, see
“A World of Connections: A Special Report on Social
Networking,” Economist, January 30, 2010.
60. Allen Adamson, “No Contest: Twitter and Facebook
Can Both Play a Role in Branding,” www.forbes.com,
May 6, 2009.
61. “Profiting From Friendship,” Economist, January 30,
2010, pp. 9–12.
62. “A Peach of Opportunity,” Economist, January 30,
2010, pp. 9–12.
63. Claire Cain Miller, “The New Back Fence,” Forbes, April
7, 2008; CafeMom, www.cafemom.com/about.
64. Michael Learmonth and Rupal Parekh, “How Influential
Are Angry Bloggers? Ask Johnson & Johnson,”
Financial Week, November 19, 2008; Seth Godin, “We
Feel Your Pain,” Seth’s Blog, November 17, 2008; Jim
Edwards, “J&J Triggers Mommy War With Motrin ‘AntiBaby Sling’ Ad,” www.bnet.com, November 17, 2008.
65. Stephen Baker, “Beware Social Media Snake Oil,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, December 14, 2009,
pp. 48–51.
66. Ralf van der Lans, Gerrit van Bruggen, Jehoshua
Eliashberg, Berend Wierenga, “A Viral Branching Model
for Predicting the Spread of Electronic Word of Mouth,”
Marketing Science 29 (March–April 2010), pp. 348–65;
Dave Balter and John Butman, “Clutter Cutter,”
Marketing Management (July–August 2006), pp. 49–50.
67. Emanuel Rosen, The Anatomy of Buzz (New York:
Currency, 2000).
68. George Silverman, The Secrets of Word-of-Mouth
Marketing (New York: AMACOM, 2001); Emanuel
Rosen, The Anatomy of Buzz (New York: Currency,
2000), chapter 12; “Viral Marketing,” Sales & Marketing
Automation (November 1999), pp. 12–14.
69. Will It Blend? www.willitblend.com; Blendtec,
www.blendtec.com; Piet Levy, “I Tube, YouTube,”
Marketing News, March 30, 2009, p. 8; Phyllis Berman,
“Food Fight,” Forbes, October 13, 2008, p. 110; Rob
Walker, “Mixing It Up,” New York Times, August 24,
2008; Jon Fine, “Ready to Get Weird, Advertisers?”
BusinessWeek, January 8, 2007, p. 24.

E56

Endnotes

70. Renée Dye, “The Buzz on Buzz,” Harvard Business
Review (November–December 2000), p. 139.
71. Robert Berner, “I Sold It through the Grapevine,”
BusinessWeek, May 29, 2006, pp. 32–34.
72. Barbara Kiviat, “Word on the Street,” Time, April 12,
2007; Dave Balter, “Rules of the Game,” Advertising
Age Point, December 2005, pp. 22–23; Scott Kirsner,
“How Much Can You Trust Buzz?” Boston Globe,
November 14, 2005; Linda Tischler, “What’s the
Buzz?” Fast Company, May 2004, pp. 76–77.
73. Matthew Creamer and Rupal Parekh, “Ideas of the
Decade,” Advertising Age, December 14, 2009.
74. Amar Cheema and Andrew M. Kaikati, “The Effect of
Need for Uniqueness on Word of Mouth,” Journal of
Marketing Research 47 (June 2010), pp. 553–63.
75. Jacqueline Johnson Brown, Peter M. Reingen, and
Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed.
(New York: Free Press, 1995); J. Johnson Brown and
Peter Reingen, “Social Ties and Word-of-Mouth
Referral Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research 14
(December 1987), pp. 350–62; Peter H. Riengen
and Jerome B. Kernan, “Analysis of Referral
Networks in Marketing: Methods and Illustration,”
Journal of Marketing Research 23 (November 1986),
pp. 37–78.
76. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things
Can Make a Big Difference (Boston: Little, Brown &
Company, 2000).
77. Terry McDermott, “Criticism of Gladwell Reaches
Tipping Point,” Columbia Journalism Review,
November 17, 2009; Clive Thompson, “Is the Tipping
Point Toast?” Fast Company, February 1, 2008;
Duncan Watts, Six Degrees: The Science of a
Connected Age (New York: W.W. Norton, 2003).
78. Douglas Atkin, The Culting of Brands: When
Customers Become True Believers (New York: Penguin,
2004); Marian Salzman, Ira Matathia, and Ann O’Reilly,
Buzz: Harness the Power of Influence and Create
Demand (New York: Wiley, 2003).
79. Bob Greenberg, “A Platform for Life,” Adweek NEXT,
September 14, 2009, p. 38.
80. Michael Trusov, Anand V. Bodapati, and Randolph E.
Bucklin, “Determining Influential Users in Internet
Social Networks,” Journal of Marketing Research 47
(August 2010), pp. 643–58.
81. Dave Balter and John Butman, “Clutter Cutter,”
Marketing Management (July–August 2006), pp. 49–50;
“Is There a Reliable Way to Measure Word-of-Mouth
Marketing?” Marketing NPV 3 (2006), pp. 3–9.
82. Digital Buzz, www.digitalbuzzblog.com; Mashable,
www.mashable.com; Atomic Ideas, www.
atomicideas.com, all accessed August 22, 2010.
83. Keith Barry, “Fiesta Stars in Night of the Living Social
Media Campaign,” Wired, May 21, 2010; Matthew
Dolan, “Ford Takes Online Gamble with New Fiesta,”
Wall Street Journal, April 8, 2009.
84. This section is based in part on an excellent summary,
“Is There a Reliable Way to Measure Word-of-Mouth

Marketing?” Marketing NPV 3 (2006), pp. 3–9, available
at www.marketingnpv.com.
85. Suzanne Vranica, “Social Media Draws a Crowd,” Wall
Street Journal, July 19, 2010; Jessi Hempel, “He
Measures the Web,” Fortune, November 9, 2009,
pp. 94–98.
86. Adam L. Penenberg, “How Much Are You Worth to
Facebook?” Fast Company, October 1, 2009.
87. Rick Lawrence, Prem Melville, Claudia Perlich, Vikas
Sindhwani, Steve Meliksetian, Pei-Yun Hsueh, and Yan
Liu, “Social Media Analytics,” OR/MS Today, February
2010, pp. 26–30.
88. “Employment by major occupational group, 2008 and
projected 2018,”
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_101.pdf.
89. John Bello, “Sell Like Your Outfit Is at Stake. It Is,”
BusinessWeek Online, February 5, 2004; John Bello,
“The Importance of Sales for Entrepreneurs,” USA
Today, February 11, 2004; Jeanine Prezioso, “Lizard
King’s Story,” Fairfield County Business Journal,
December 10, 2001.
90. Shrihari Sridhar, Murali K. Mantrala, and Sönke Albers,
“Personal Selling Elasticities: A Meta-Analysis,”
Journal of Marketing Research 47 (October 2010).
91. Adapted from Robert N. McMurry, “The Mystique of
Super-Salesmanship,” Harvard Business Review,
March–April 1961, p. 114. Also see William C. Moncrief
III, “Selling Activity and Sales Position Taxonomies for
Industrial Sales Forces,” Journal of Marketing
Research 23 (August 1986), pp. 261–70.
92. Lawrence G. Friedman and Timothy R. Furey, The
Channel Advantage: Going to Marketing with Multiple
Sales Channels (Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann,
1999).
93. Michael Ahearne, Scott B. MacKenzie, Philip M.
Podsakoff, John E. Mathieu, and Son K. Lam, “The Role
of Consensus in Sales Team Performance,” Journal of
Marketing Research 47 (June 2010), pp. 458–69.
94. Ashwin W. Joshi, “Salesperson Influence on Product
Development: Insights from a Study of Small
Manufacturing Organizations,” Journal of Marketing 74
(January 2010), pp. 94–107; Philip Kotler, Neil Rackham,
and Suj Krishnaswamy, “Ending the War between Sales &
Marketing,” Harvard Business Review, July–August
2006, pp. 68–78; Timothy M. Smith, Srinath
Gopalakrishna, and Rubikar Chaterjee, “A Three-Stage
Model of Integrated Marketing Communications at the
Marketing-Sales Interface,” Journal of Marketing
Research 43 (November 2006), pp. 546–79.
95. Michael Copeland, “Hits and Misses,” Business 2.0,
April 2004, p. 142.
96. “Sales Performance Benchmarks,” Go-to-Market
Strategies, June 5, 2007. For international tax
implications in compensation, see Dominique Rouziès,
Anne T. Coughlan, Erin Anderson, and Dawn
Iacobucci, “Determinants of Pay Levels and Structures
in Sales Organizations,” Journal of Marketing 73
(November 2009), pp. 92–104.

97. Tony Ritigliano and Benson Smith, Discover Your
Sales Strengths (New York: Random House Business
Books, 2004).
98. Sonke Albers, “Sales-Force Management—
Compensation, Motivation, Selection, and Training,”
Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of
Marketing (London: Sage, 2002), pp. 248–66.
99. Nanette Byrnes, “Avon Calling—Lots of New Reps,”
BusinessWeek, June 2, 2003, pp. 53–54.
100. Michael R. W. Bommer, Brian F. O’Neil, and Beheruz
N. Sethna, “A Methodology for Optimizing Selling
Time of Salespersons,” Journal of Marketing Theory
and Practice (Spring 1994), pp. 61–75. See also,
Lissan Joseph, “On the Optimality of Delegating
Pricing Authority to the Sales Force,” Journal of
Marketing 65 (January 2001), pp. 62–70.
101. Dartnell Corporation, 30th Sales-Force Compensation
Survey (Chicago: Dartnell Corp., 1999). Other
breakdowns show that 12.7 percent is spent in
service calls, 16 percent in administrative tasks, 25.1
percent in telephone selling, and 17.4 percent in
waiting/traveling. For analysis of this database, see
Sanjog Misra, Anne T. Coughlan, and Chakravarthi
Narasimhan, “Salesforce Compensation: An Analytical
and Empirical Examination of the Agency Theoretic
Approach, Quantitative Marketing and Economics 3
(March 2005), pp. 5–39.
102. Michael Ahearne, Son K. Lam, John E. Mathieu, and
Willy Bolander, “Why Are Some Salespeople Better at
Adapting to Organizational Change?” Journal of
Marketing 74 (May 2010), pp. 65–79.
103. Willem Verbeke and Richard P. Bagozzi, “Sales-Call
Anxiety: Exploring What It Means When Fear Rules a
Sales Encounter,” Journal of Marketing 64 (July 2000),
pp. 88–101. See also, Douglas E. Hughes and
Michael Ahearne, “Energizing the Reseller’s Sales
Force: The Power of Brand Identification,” Journal of
Marketing 74 (July 2010), pp. 81–96.
104. Gilbert A. Churchill Jr., Neil M. Ford, Orville C. Walker
Jr., Mark W. Johnston, and Greg W. Marshall,
Sales-Force Management, 9th ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2009). See also, Eric G. Harris,
John C. Mowen, and Tom J. Brown, “Reexamining
Salesperson Goal Orientations: Personality Influencers,
Customer Orientation, and Work Satisfaction,” Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 33 (Winter 2005),
pp. 19–35; Manfred Krafft, “An Empirical Investigation
of the Antecedents of Sales-Force Control Systems,”
Journal of Marketing 63 (July 1999), pp. 120–34; Wujin
Chu, Eitan Gerstner, and James D. Hess, “Costs and
Benefits of Hard Sell,” Journal of Marketing Research
32 (February 1995), pp. 97–102.
105. Noah Lim, Michael J. Ahearne, and Sung H. Ham,
“Designing Sales Contests: Does the Prize Structure
Matter?” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (June
2009), pp. 356–71.
106. Lisa Vaas, “Oracle Teaches Its Sales Force to Play
Nice,” eWeek, July 28, 2004; Lisa Vaas, “Oracle’s
Sales Force Reorg Finally Bears Fruit,” eWeek,
Endnotes

E57

December 17, 2003; Ian Mount, “Out of Control,”
Business 2.0, August 2002, pp. 38–44.
107. Philip M. Posdakoff and Scott B. MacKenzie,
“Organizational Citizenship Behaviors and Sales-Unit
Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing Research 31
(August 1994), pp. 351–63. See also, Andrea L.
Dixon, Rosann L. Spiro, and Magbul Jamil,
“Successful and Unsuccessful Sales Calls:
Measuring Salesperson Attributions and Behavioral
Intentions,” Journal of Marketing 65 (July 2001), pp.
64–78; Willem Verbeke and Richard P. Bagozzi,
“Sales-Call Anxiety: Exploring What It Means When
Fear Rules a Sales Encounter,” Journal of Marketing
64 (July 2000), pp. 88–101.
108. Neil Rackham, SPIN Selling (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1988). Also see his The SPIN Selling Fieldbook (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1996); James Lardner, “Selling
Salesmanship,” Business 2.0, December
2002–January 2003, p. 66; Sharon Drew Morgen,
Selling with Integrity: Reinventing Sales through
Collaboration, Respect, and Serving (New York:
Berkeley Books, 1999); Neil Rackham and John De
Vincentis, Rethinking the Sales Force (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1996).
109. Some of the following discussion is based on a classic
analysis in W. J. E. Crissy, William H. Cunningham,
and Isabella C. M. Cunningham, Selling: The Personal
Force in Marketing (New York: Wiley, 1977), pp.
119–29. For some contemporary perspective and tips,
see Jia Lynn Yang, “How to Sell in a Lousy Economy,”
Fortune, September 29, 2008, pp. 101–6 and Jessi
Hempel, “IBM’s All-Star Salesman,” Fortune,
September 29, 2008, pp. 110–19.
110. Stephanie Clifford, “Putting the Performance in Sales
Performance,” Inc., February 2007, pp. 87–95.
111. Joel E. Urbany, “Justifying Profitable Pricing,”
Journal of Product & Brand Management 10 (2001),
pp.141–59.
112. Jia Lynn Yang, “How Can I Keep My Sales Team
Productive in a Recession?” Fortune, March 2,
2009, p. 22.
113. V. Kumar, Rajkumar Venkatesan, and Werner Reinartz,
“Performance Implications of Adopting a CustomerFocused Sales Campaign,” Journal of Marketing 72
(September 2008), pp. 50–68; George R. Franke and
Jeong-Eun Park, “Salesperson Adaptive Selling
Behavior and Customer Orientation: A MetaAnalysis,” Journal of Marketing Research 43
(November 2006), pp. 693–702; Richard G.
McFarland, Goutam N. Challagalla, and Tasadduq A.
Shervani, “Influence Tactics for Effective Adaptive
Selling,” Journal of Marketing 70 (October 2006),
pp. 103–17.

Chapter 20
1. Brad Stone, “Nintendo Wii to Add Netflix Service for
Streaming Video,” New York Times, January 13, 2010;
Eric A. Taub, “Will Nothing Slow Wii?” New York Times
Bits Blog, October 17, 2008; John Gaudiosi, “How the
E58

Endnotes

Wii Is Creaming the Competition,” Business 2.0, April 25,
2007; Martin Fackler, “Putting the We Back in Wii,” New
York Times, June 8, 2007.
2. For some scholarly reviews, see Ely Dahan and John
R. Hauser, “Product Development: Managing a
Dispersed Process,” Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley,
eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage, 2002),
pp. 179–222; Dipak Jain, “Managing New-Product
Development for Strategic Competitive Advantage,”
Dawn Iacobucci, ed., Kellogg on Marketing, (New
York: Wiley, 2001), pp. 130–48; Jerry Wind and Vijay
Mahajan, “Issues and Opportunities in New-Product
Development: An Introduction to the Special Issue,”
Journal of Marketing Research 34 (February 1997),
pp. 1–12. For an overview of different industry
approaches, see Frank T. Rothaermel and Andrew M.
Hess, “Innovation Strategies Combined,” MIT Sloan
Management Review (Spring 2010), pp. 13–15.
3. Scott Sanderude, “Growth from Harvesting the Sky:
The $200 Million Challenge,” talk at Marketing Science
Institute Conference: New Frontiers for Growth,
Boston, MA, April 2005.
4. Stephen J. Carson, “When to Give Up Control of
Outsourced New-Product Development,” Journal of
Marketing 71 (January 2007), pp. 49–66.
5. Elaine Wong, “P&G’s ’09 Success Hinged on Value,
Affordable Luxury,” Brandweek, March 22, 2010,
p. 8.
6. For some academic discussion of the effects of newproduct introductions on markets, see Harald J. Van
Heerde, Carl F. Mela, and Puneet Manchanda, “The
Dynamic Effect of Innovation on Market Structure,”
Journal of Marketing Research 41 (May 2004),
pp. 166–83; and for a contrast with radically different
new products, see Khaled Aboulnasr, Om Narasimhan,
Edward Blair, and Rajesh Chandy, “Competitive
Response to Radical Product Innovations,” Journal
of Marketing 72 (May 2008), pp. 94–110.
7. “Enabling Multifaceted Innovation,” IBM Global
Business Services, www-935.ibm.com/services/us/
gbs/bus/pdf/g510-6310-executive-brief-enablingmultifaceted.pdf, 2006.
8. Shuba Srinivasan, Koen Pauwels, Jorge Silva-Risso,
and Dominique M. Hanssens, “Product Innovations,
Advertising and Stock Returns,” Journal of Marketing
73 (January 2009), pp. 24–43; Alina B. Sorescu and
Jelena Spanjol, “Innovation’s Effect on Firm Value
and Risk: Insights from Consumer Packaged Goods,”
Journal of Marketing 72 (March 2008), pp. 114–32;
Sungwook Min, Manohar U. Kalwani, and William T.
Robinson, “Market Pioneer and Early Follower
Survival Risks: A Contingency Analysis of Really New
versus Incrementally New Product-Markets,” Journal
of Marketing 70 (January 2006), pp. 15–33; C. Page
Moreau, Arthur B. Markman, and Donald R.
Lehmann, “‘What Is It?’ Category Flexibility and
Consumers’ Response to Really New Products,”
Journal of Consumer Research 27 (March 2001),
pp. 489–98.

9. Stefan Wuyts, Shantanu Dutta, and Stefan Stremersch,
“Portfolios of Interfirm Agreements in TechnologyIntensive Markets: Consequences for Innovation and
Profitability,” Journal of Marketing 68 (April 2004),
pp. 88–100; Aric Rindfleisch and Christine Moorman,
“The Acquisition and Utilization of Information in
New-Product Alliance: A Strength-of-Ties
Perspective,” Journal of Marketing 65 (April 2001),
pp. 1–18. See also, Raghunath Singh Rao, Rajesh K.
Chandy, and Jaideep C. Prabhu, “The Fruits of
Legitimacy: Why Some New Ventures Gain More from
Innovation Than Others,” Journal of Marketing 72 (July
2008), pp. 58–75.
10. Gerard J. Tellis, Jaideep C. Prabhu, and Rajesh K.
Chandy, “Radical Innovation across Nations: The
Preeminence of Corporate Culture,” Journal of
Marketing 73 (January 2009), pp. 3–23.
11. Steve Hoeffler, “Measuring Preferences for Really New
Products,” Journal of Marketing Research 40
(November 2003), pp. 406–20; Glen Urban, Bruce
Weinberg, and John R. Hauser, “Premarket Forecasting
of Really New Products,” Journal of Marketing 60
(January 1996), pp. 47–60.
12. Andy Grove, “Think Disruptive,” Condé Nast Portfolio,
December 2007, pp. 170–75; Ashish Sood and Gerard
J. Tellis, “Technological Evolution and Radical
Innovation,” Journal of Marketing 69 (July 2005),
pp. 152–68.
13. For more discussion, see Jakki Mohr, Marketing of
High-Technology Products and Innovations, 2nd ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005).
14. Carol Matlack, “How Danone Turns Bacteria into
Bucks,” BusinessWeek, November 15, 2007, pp. 76–77;
Jack Ewing, “The Bimmer, Plugged In,” BusinessWeek,
March 23 and 30, 2009, p. 78; Beth Kowitt, “Blackboard
Rules the Schools,” Fortune, November 9, 2009, p. 28.
15. Steve Hamm, “Speed Demons,” BusinessWeek, March
27, 2006, pp. 69–76.
16. Christina Passariello, “Brand New Bag: Louis Vuitton
Tries Modern Methods on Factory Lines,” Wall Street
Journal, October 9, 2006.
17. Gary Hamel, “W. L. Gore: Lessons from a Management
Revolutionary,” Wall Street Journal, March 18, 2010;
“The World’s Most Innovative Companies,” Fast
Company, March 2009; Brad Weiners, “Gore-Tex
Tackles the Great Indoors,” Business 2.0, April 2004,
p. 32; Ann Harrington, “Who’s Afraid of a New
Product,” Fortune, November 10, 2003, pp. 189–92.
18. Tim Brown, Change by Design: How Design Thinking
Transforms Organizations and Inspires Innovation (New
York: HarperCollins, 2009).
19. Clayton M. Christensen, Disrupting Class: How Disruptive
Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2008); Clayton M. Christensen, The
Innovator’s Solution: Creating and Sustaining Successful
Growth (Boston: Harvard University Press, 2003); Clayton
M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard
University Press, 1997).

20. Ely Dahan and John R. Hauser, “Product Development:
Managing a Dispersed Process,” Bart Weitz and Robin
Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage,
2002), pp. 179–222.
21. Robert G. Cooper and Elko J. Kleinschmidt, New
Products: The Key Factors in Success (Chicago:
American Marketing Association, 1990).
22. Ibid., pp. 35–38.
23. Susumu Ogama and Frank T. Piller, “Reducing the
Risks of New-Product Development,” MIT Sloan
Management Review 47 (Winter 2006), pp. 65–71; A.C.
Nielsen, “New-Product Introduction—Successful
Innovation/Failure: Fragile Boundary,” A.C. Nielsen
BASES and Ernst & Young Global Client Consulting,
June 24, 1999; Deloitte and Touche, “Vision in
Manufacturing Study,” Deloitte Consulting and
Kenan-Flagler Business School, March 6, 1998.
24. For more discussion, see Dipak Jain, “Managing
New-Product Development for Strategic Competitive
Advantage,” Dawn Iacobucci, ed., Kellogg on
Marketing (New York: Wiley, 2001).
25. Steve Hamm, “Speed Demons,” BusinessWeek, March
27, 2006, pp. 69–76.
26. Tom McNichol, “A Start-Up’s Best Friend? Failure,”
Business 2.0, March 2007, pp. 39–41.
27. Thomas N. Burton, “By Learning from Failures Lilly
Keeps Drug Pipelines Full,” Wall Street Journal, April 21,
2004.
28. Amy Barrett, “J&J: Reinventing How It Invents,”
BusinessWeek, April 17, 2006, pp. 60–61.
29. Virginia Gardiner, “Dyson Airblade,” Dwell, March 10,
2010; Reena Jana, “Dyson’s Air Multiplier: Flaw as
Function,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, October 12,
2009; Chuck Salter, “Failure Doesn’t Suck,” Fast
Company, May 2007, p. 44.
30. Vijay Govindrajan and Chris Trimble, “Stop the
Innovation Wars,” Harvard Business Review,
July–August 2010, pp. 76–83; Doug Ayers, Robert
Dahlstrom, and Steven J. Skinner, “An Exploratory
Investigation of Organizational Antecedents to NewProduct Success,” Journal of Marketing Research 34
(February 1997), pp. 107–16; David S. Hopkins,
Options in New-Product Organization (New York:
Conference Board, 1974).
31. Brian Hindo, “Rewiring Westinghouse,” BusinessWeek,
May 19, 2008, pp. 48–49.
32. Danielle Sacks, Chuck Salter, Alan Deutschman, and
Scott Kirsner, “Innovation Scouts,” Fast Company, May
2007, p. 90; “Ongoing Innovation: Tom Malloy on
Sustaining the Relevance and Impact of Adobe’s
Advanced Technology Labs,” Knowledge@Wharton,
March 21, 2007; Shantanu Narayen, “Connecting the
Dots Isn’t Enough,” New York Times, July 18, 2009.
33. Lisa C. Troy, Tanat Hirunyawipada, and Audhesh K.
Paswan, “Cross-Functional Integration and New
Product Success: An Empirical Investigation of the
Findings,” Journal of Marketing 72 (September 2008),
pp. 132–46; Rajesh Sethi, Daniel C. Smith, and C.
Endnotes

E59

Whan Park, “Cross-Functional Product Development
Teams, Creativity, and the Innovativeness of New
Consumer Products,” Journal of Marketing Research
38 (February 2001), pp. 73–85.
34. Robert G. Cooper, Winning at New Products:
Accelerating the Process from Idea to Launch
(New York: Perseus Publishing, 2001); See also,
Robert G. Cooper, “Stage-Gate Systems: A New Tool
for Managing New Products,” Business Horizons,
May–June 1990, pp. 44–54; Robert G. Cooper, “The
NewProd System: The Industry Experience,” Journal
of Product Innovation Management 9 (June 1992),
pp. 113–27.
35. Robert G. Cooper, Product Leadership: Creating and
Launching Superior New Products (New York: Perseus
Books, 1998).
36. Rajesh Sethi and Zafar Iqbal, “Stage-Gate Controls,
Learning Failure, and Adverse Effect on Novel New
Products,” Journal of Marketing 72 (January 2008),
pp. 118–34.
37. Ely Dahan and John R. Hauser, “Product Development:
Managing a Dispersed Process,” Bart Weitz and Robin
Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage,
2002), pp. 179–222.
38. Another alternative approach to the funnel process
advocates “rocketing.” See, David Nichols, Return on
Ideas (West Sussex, England: Wiley, 2007).
39. Michael Zedalis, “Deploying Stage-Gate on a Global
Scale—Critical Elements That Drive Performance” and
Charles Gagnon, “Driving Value Creation with the Right
Portfolio Mix,” talks given at Stage-Gate Leadership
Summit 2007.
40. John Hauser, Gerard J. Tellis, and Abbie Griffin,
“Research on Innovation: A Review and Agenda for
Marketing Science,” Marketing Science 25
(November–December 2006), pp. 687–717.
41. Byron Acohido, “Microsoft Cultures Creativity in
Unique Lab,” USA Today, July 11, 2007; Erich
Joachimsthaler, Hidden in Plain Sight: How to Find and
Execute Your Company’s Next Big Growth Strategy
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2007); Subin
Im and John P. Workman Jr., “Market Orientation,
Creativity, and New-Product Performance in HighTechnology Firms,” Journal of Marketing 68 (April
2004), pp. 114–32.
42. Erich Joachimsthaler, Hidden in Plain Sight: How to Find
and Execute Your Company’s Next Big Growth Strategy
(Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2007).
43. Henry Chesbrough, Open Business Models: How to
Thrive in the New-Innovation Landscape (Boston:
Harvard University Press, 2006); Eric Von Hippel,
Democratizing Innovation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2005); Burt Helm, “Inside a White-Hot Idea Factory,”
BusinessWeek, January 15, 2005, pp. 72–73; C.K.
Prahalad and Venkat Ramaswamy, The Future of
Competition: Cocreating Unique Value with Customers
(Boston: Harvard University Press, 2004); Henry
Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The New Imperative for
Creating and Profiting from Technology (Boston:
Harvard University Press, 2003).
E60

Endnotes

44. Bruce Horovitz, “Marketers Zooming in on Your
Daily Routines,” USA Today, April 30, 2007; Ashwin
W. Joshi and Sanjay Sharma, “Customer Knowledge
Development: Antecedents and Impact on New-Product
Performance,” Journal of Marketing 68 (October 2004),
pp. 47–59.
45. Abbie J. Griffin and John Hauser, “The Voice of the
Customer,” Marketing Science 12 (Winter 1993),
pp. 1–27.
46. Miho Inada, “Tokyo Café Targets Trend Makers,” Wall
Street Journal, August 24, 2008.
47. Peter C. Honebein and Roy F. Cammarano,
“Customers at Work,” Marketing Management 15
(January–February 2006), pp. 26–31; Peter C.
Honebein and Roy F. Cammarano, Creating Do-ItYourself Customers: How Great Customer Experiences
Build Great Companies (Mason, OH: Texere
Southwestern Educational Publishing, 2005).
48. Jeff Howe, Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the
Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business (New York,
Crown Business, 2008).
49. Guido Jouret, “Inside Cisco’s Search for the Next Big
Idea,” Harvard Business Review, September 2009,
pp. 43–45; Anya Kamentz, “The Power of the Prize,”
Fast Company, May 2008, pp. 43–45; Cisco,
www.cisco.com/web/solutions/iprize/index.html.
50. Patricia Seybold, Outside Innovation: How Your
Customers Will Codesign Your Company’s Future (New
York: Collins, 2006).
51. Helena Yli-Renko and Ramkumar Janakiraman, “How
Customer Portfolio Affects New Product Development
in Technology-Based Firms, Journal of Marketing 72
(September 2008), pp. 131–48; Donna L. Hoffman,
Praveen K. Kopalle, and Thomas P. Novak, “The ‘Right’
Consumers for Better Concepts: Identifying and Using
Consumers High in Emergent Nature to Further
Develop New Product Concepts,” Journal of Marketing
Research 47 (October 2010), in press.
52. Pioneering work in this area is represented by Eric von
Hippel, “Lead Users: A Source of Novel Product
Concepts,” Management Science 32 (July 1986),
pp. 791–805. Also see Eric von Hippel, The Sources of
Innovation (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988);
Eric von Hippel, Democratizing Innovation (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2005); and Pamela D. Morrison, John
H. Roberts and David F. Midgley, “The Nature of Lead
Users and Measurement of Leading Edge Status,”
Research Policy 33 (2004), pp. 351–62.
53. John W. Heinke Jr. and Chun Zhang, “Increasing
Supplier-Driven Innovation,” MIT Sloan Management
Review (Winter 2010), pp. 41–46; Eric (Er) Fang,
“Customer Participation and the Trade-Off Between
New Product Innovativeness and Speed to Market,”
Journal of Marketing 72 (July 2008), pp. 90–104. Note
that this research also shows that customer involvement
can also slow the development process if a high level of
interaction and coordination is required across stages.
54. Kevin Zheng Zhou, Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim, and David K.
Tse, “The Effects of Strategic Orientations on
Technology- and Market-Based Breakthrough

Innovations,” Journal of Marketing 69 (April 2005),
pp. 42–60; Michael Treacy, “Ignore the Consumer,”
Advertising Age Point (September 2005), pp. 15–19.
55. Sharon Machlis, “Innovation and the 20% Solution,”
Computerworld, February 2, 2009.
56. “The World’s Fifty Most Innovative Companies,”
Special Report, BusinessWeek, May 9, 2007.
57. Darren W. Dahl and Page Moreau, “The Influence and
Value of Analogical Thinking during New-Product
Ideation,” Journal of Marketing Research 39 (February
2002), pp. 47–60; Michael Michalko, Cracking
Creativity: The Secrets of Creative Genius (Berkeley,
CA: Ten Speed Press, 1998); James M. Higgins, 101
Creative Problem-Solving Techniques (New York: New
Management, 1994).
58. Philip Kotler and Fernando Trias de Bes, Lateral
Marketing: New Techniques for Finding Breakthrough
Ideas (New York: Wiley, 2003).
59. NBC Research, “Friends,” Program Test Report, May
27, 1994; and NBC’s Failing Grade for “Friends,” The
Smoking Gun. May 10, 2004, www.smokinggun.com.
60. Olivier Toubia and Laurent Florès, “Adaptive Idea
Screening Using Consumers,” Marketing Science 26
(May–June 2007), pp. 342–60; Melanie Wells, “Have It
Your Way,” Forbes, February 14, 2005.
61. David L. Alexander, John G. Lynch Jr., and Qing Wang,
“As Time Goes By: Do Cold Feet Follow Warm
Intentions for Really New Versus Incrementally New
Products,” Journal of Marketing Research 45 (June
2008), pp. 307–19; Steve Hoeffler, “Measuring
Preferences for Really New Products,” Journal of
Marketing Research 40 (November 2003), pp. 406–20.
62. Min Zhao, Steve Hoeffler, and Darren W. Dahl, “The
Role of Imagination-Focused Visualization on New
Product Evaluation,” Journal of Marketing Research 46
(February 2009), pp. 46–55; Raquel Castano, Mita
Sujan, Manish Kacker, Harish Sujan, “Managing
Customer Uncertainty in the Adoption of New Products:
Temporal Distance and Mental Stimulation,” Journal of
Marketing Research 45 (June 2008), pp. 320–36; Dahl
and Moreau, “The Influence and Value of Analogical
Thinking during New-Product Ideation,” Journal of
Marketing Research 39; Michelle L. Roehm and Brian
Sternthal, “The Moderating Effect of Knowledge and
Resources on the Persuasive Impact of Analogies,”
Journal of Consumer Research 28 (September 2001),
pp. 257–72; Darren W. Dahl, Amitava Chattopadhyay,
and Gerald J. Gorn, “The Use of Visual Mental Imagery
in New-Product Design,” Journal of Marketing
Research 36 (February 1999), pp. 18–28.
63. Steve Hamm, “Speed Demons,” BusinessWeek, March
27, 2006, pp. 69–76.
64. Jon Fortt, “Heavy Duty Computing,” Fortune, March 2,
2009, pp. 34–36.
65. For additional information, also see David Bakken and
Curtis L. Frazier, “Conjoint Analysis: Understanding
Consumer Decision Making,” Rajiv Grover and Marco
Vriens, eds., The Handbook of Marketing Research
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2006); Vithala R. Rao and

John R. Hauser, “Conjoint Analysis, Related Modeling,
and Application,” Yoram Wind and Paul E. Green, eds.,
Market Research and Modeling: Progress and
Prospects: A Tribute to Paul Green (New York: Springer,
2004), pp. 141–68; Jordan J. Louviere, David A.
Hensher, and Joffre D. Swait, Stated Choice Models:
Analysis and Applications (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2000); Paul E. Green and V.
Srinivasan, “Conjoint Analysis in Marketing: New
Developments with Implications for Research and
Practice,” Journal of Marketing 54 (October 1990),
pp. 3–19; Sawtooth Software. For another approach,
see Young-Hoon Park, Min Ding and Vithala R. Rao,
“Eliciting Preference for Complex Products: A WebBased Upgrading Method,” Journal of Marketing
Research 45 (October 2008), pp. 562–74.
66. Jerry Wind, Paul Green, Douglas Shifflet, and Marsha
Scarbrough, “Courtyard by Marriott: Designing a Hotel
Facility with Consumer-Based Marketing Models,”
Interfaces 19 (January–February 1989), pp. 25–47; For
another interesting application, see Paul E. Green,
Abba M. Krieger, and Terry Vavra, “Evaluating EZ-Pass:
Using Conjoint Analysis to Assess Consumer
Response to a New Tollway Technology,” Marketing
Research (Summer 1999), pp. 5–16.
67. The full-profile example was taken from Paul E. Green
and Yoram Wind, “New Ways to Measure Consumers’
Judgments,” Harvard Business Review, July–August
1975, pp. 107–17.
68. Peter N. Golder and Gerald J. Tellis, “Will It Ever Fly?
Modeling the Takeoff of Really New Consumer
Durables,” Marketing Science 16 (Summer 1997),
pp. 256–70; Glen L. Urban, Bruce D. Weinberg, and
John R. Hauser, “Premarket Forecasting of Really New
Products,” Journal of Marketing 60 (January 1996),
pp. 47–60; Robert Blattberg and John Golany,
“Tracker: An Early Test-Market Forecasting and
Diagnostic Model for New-Product Planning,” Journal
of Marketing Research 15 (May 1978), pp. 192–202.
69. Roger A. Kerin, Michael G. Harvey, and James T.
Rothe, “Cannibalism and New-Product Development,”
Business Horizons, October 1978, pp. 25–31.
70. The present value (V) of a future sum (I) to be received t
years from today and discounted at the interest rate (r)
is given by V = It/(1 + r)t. Thus $4,716,000/(1.15)5 =
$2,345,000.
71. John Hauser, “House of Quality,” Harvard Business
Review, May–June 1988, pp. 63–73; Customer-driven
engineering is also called “quality function deployment.”
See also, Lawrence R. Guinta and Nancy C. Praizler, The
QFD Book: The Team Approach to Solving Problems and
Satisfying Customers through Quality Function
Deployment (New York: AMACOM, 1993); and V.
Srinivasan, William S. Lovejoy, and David Beach,
“Integrated Product Design for Marketability and
Manufacturing,” Journal of Marketing Research 34
(February 1997), pp. 154–63.
72. Tom Peters, The Circle of Innovation (New York:
Vintage, 1999), p. 96. For more general discussion, see
Endnotes

E61

also, Sethi, “New Product Quality and Product
Development Teams,” Journal of Marketing 64 (April
2000), pp. 1–14; Moorman and Miner, “The
Convergence of Planning and Execution Improvisation
in New-Product Development,” pp. 1–20; MacChavan
and Graver, “From Embedded Knowledge to
Embodied Knowledge,” pp. 1–12.
73. Kevin J. Clancy, Peter C. Krieg, and Marianne McGarry
Wolf, Marketing New Products Successfully: Using
Simulated Test Marketing Methodology (New York:
Lexington Books, 2005); Glen L. Urban, John R.
Hauser, and Roberta A. Chicos, “Information
Acceleration: Validation and Lessons from the Field,”
Journal of Marketing Research 34 (February 1997),
pp. 143–53; V. Mahajan and Jerry Wind, “New Product
Models: Practice, Shortcomings, and Desired
Improvements,” Journal of Product Innovation
Management 9 (June 1992), pp. 129–39.
74. Eyal Biyalogorsky, William Boulding, and Richard
Staelin, “Stuck in the Past: Why Managers Persist
with New-Product Failures,” Journal of Marketing 70
(April 2006), pp. 108–21.
75. Rajesh Chandy, Brigette Hopstaken, Om Narasimhan,
and Jaideep Prabhu, “From Invention to Innovation:
Conversion Ability in Product Development,” Journal of
Marketing Research 43 (August 2006), pp. 494–508.
76. Remco Prins and Peter C. Verhoef, “Marketing
Communication Drivers of Adoption Timing of a New
E-Service among Existing Customers,” Journal of
Marketing 71 (April 2007), pp. 169–83.
77. For further discussion, see Feryal Erhun, Paulo
Conçalves, and Jay Hopman, “The Art of Managing
New Product Transitions,” MIT Sloan Management
Review 48 (Spring 2007), pp. 73–80; Yuhong Wu,
Sridhar Balasubramanian, and Vijay Mahajan, “When Is
a Preannounced New Product Likely to Be Delayed?”
Journal of Marketing 68 (April 2004), pp. 101–13; Raji
Srinivasan, Gary L. Lilien, and Arvind Rangaswamy,
“First in First out? The Effects of Network Externalities
on Pioneer Survival,” Journal of Marketing 68 (January
2004), pp. 41–58; Barry L. Bayus, Sanjay Jain, and
Ambar Rao, “Truth or Consequences: An Analysis of
Truth or Vaporware and New-Product
Announcements,” Journal of Marketing Research 38
(February 2001), pp. 3–13; Thomas S. Robertson,
Jehoshua Eliashberg, and Talia Rymon, “New-Product
Announcement Signals and Incumbent Reactions,”
Journal of Marketing 59 (July 1995), pp. 1–15; Frank H.
Alpert and Michael A. Kamins, “Pioneer Brand
Advantages and Consumer Behavior: A Conceptual
Framework and Propositional Inventory,” Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 22 (Summer 1994),
pp. 244–336; Robert J. Thomas, “Timing: The Key to
Market Entry,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 2
(Summer 1985), pp. 77–87.
78. Yvonne van Everdingen, Dennis Folk, and Stefan
Stremersch, “Modeling Global Spillover in New
Product Takeoff,” Journal of Marketing Research 46
(October 2009), pp. 637–52; Katrijn Gielens and
Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, “Drivers of Consumer
E62

Endnotes

Acceptance of New Packaged Goods: An Investigation
across Products and Countries,” International Journal
of Research in Marketing 24 (June 2007), pp. 97–111;
Marc Fischer, Venkatesh Shankar, and Michael
Clement, “Can a Late Mover Use International Market
Entry Strategy to Challenge the Pioneer?” Marketing
Science Institute Working Paper 05-118, Cambridge,
MA; Venkatesh Shankar, Gregory S. Carpenter, and
Lakshman Krishnamukthi, “Late Mover Advantages:
How Innovative Late Entrants Outsell Pioneers,”
Journal of Marketing Research 35 (February 1998),
pp. 54–70.
79. Philip Kotler and Gerald Zaltman, “Targeting Prospects
for a New Product,” Journal of Advertising Research
(February 1976), pp. 7–20.
80. Mark Leslie and Charles A. Holloway, “The Sales
Learning Curve,” Harvard Business Review,
July–August 2006, pp. 114–23.
81. For details, see Keith G. Lockyer, Critical Path Analysis
and Other Project Network Techniques (London:
Pitman, 1984); see also; Arvind Rangaswamy and Gary
L. Lilien, “Software Tools for New-Product
Development,” Journal of Marketing Research 34
(February 1997), pp. 177–84.
82. The following discussion leans heavily on Everett M.
Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations (New York: Free Press,
1962). Also see his third edition, published in 1983.
83. C. Page Moreau, Donald R. Lehmann, and Arthur B.
Markman, “Entrenched Knowledge Structures and
Consumer Response to New Products,” Journal of
Marketing Research 38 (February 2001), pp. 14–29.
84. John T. Gourville, “Eager Sellers & Stony Buyers,”
Harvard Business Review, June 2006, pp. 99–106.
85. Chuan-Fong Shih and Alladi Venkatesh, “Beyond
Adoption: Development and Application of a UseDiffusion Model,” Journal of Marketing 68 (January
2004), pp. 59–72.
86. Michal Herzenstein, Steven S. Posavac, and J. Joško
Brakuz, “Adoption of New and Really New Products:
The Effects of Self-Regulation Systems and Risk
Salience,” Journal of Marketing Research 44 (May 2007),
pp. 251–60; Christophe Van den Bulte and Yogesh V.
Joshi, “New-Product Diffusion with Influentials and
Imitators,” Marketing Science 26 (May–June 2007),
pp 400–21; Steve Hoeffler, “Measuring Preferences for
Really New Products,” Journal of Marketing Research 40
(November 2003), pp. 406–20.
87. Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations (New York:
Free Press, 1962), p. 192; Geoffrey A. Moore, Crossing
the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-Tech Products
to Mainstream Customers (New York: HarperBusiness,
1999); For an interesting application with services, see
Barak Libai, Eitan Muller, and Renana Peres, “The
Diffusion of Services,” Journal of Marketing Research
46 (April 2009), pp. 163–75.
88. A. Parasuraman and Charles L. Colby, Techno-Ready
Marketing (New York: Free Press, 2001); Jakki Mohr,
Marketing of High-Technology Products and
Innovations (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2001).

89. Jordan Robertson, “How Nike Got Street Cred,”
Business 2.0, May 2004, pp. 43–46.
90. Cliff Edwards, “Will Souping Up TiVo Save It?”
BusinessWeek, May 17, 2004, pp. 63–64; Cliff
Edwards, “Is TiVo’s Signal Still Fading?”
BusinessWeek, September 10, 2001, pp. 72–74.

10. “US Export Fact Sheet,” International Trade
Administration, http:// trade.gov/press/press_releases/
2009/export-factsheet_021109.pdf.
11. Jan Johanson and Finn Wiedersheim-Paul, “The
Internationalization of the Firm,” Journal of Management
Studies 12 (October 1975), pp. 305–22.

91. Fareena Sultan, John U. Farley, and Donald R. Lehman,
“Reflection on ‘A Meta-Analysis of Applications of
Diffusion Models,’” Journal of Marketing Research 33
(May 1996), pp. 247–49; Vijay Mahajan, Eitan Muller,
and Frank M. Bass, “Diffusion of New Products:
Empirical Generalizations and Managerial Uses,”
Marketing Science 14 (Summer 1995), pp. G79–G89;
Minhi Hahn, Sehoon Park, and Andris A. Zoltners,
“Analysis of New-Product Diffusion Using a FourSegment Trial-Repeat Model,” Marketing Science 13
(Summer 1994), pp. 224–47; Hubert Gatignon and
Thomas S. Robertson, “A Propositional Inventory for
New Diffusion Research,” Journal of Consumer
Research 11 (March 1985), pp. 849–67.

13. For a thorough review of academic research on
global marketing, see Johny K. Johansson, “Global
Marketing: Research on Foreign Entry, Local
Marketing, Global Management,” Bart Weitz and
Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London:
Sage, 2002), pp. 457–83. Also see Johny K.
Johansson, Global Marketing, 5th ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2009). For some global marketing
research issues, see C. Samuel Craig and Susan P.
Douglas, International Marketing Research, 3rd ed.
(Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).

Chapter 21

14. Marc Gunther, “The World’s New Economic
Landscape,” Fortune, July 26, 2010, pp. 105–106.

1. Mehul Srivastava, “What the Nano Means to India,”
BusinessWeek, May 11, 2009, pp. 60–61; Steve
Hamm, “IBM vs. Tata: Which Is More American?”
BusinessWeek, May 5, 2008, p. 28; Manjeet
Kirpalani, “Tata: The Master of The Gentle
Approach,” BusinessWeek, February 25, 2008,
pp. 64–66; Kevin Maney, “Model T(ata),” Condé Nast
Portfolio, February 2008, pp. 35–36; David Welch and
Nandini Lakshman, “My Other Car Is a Tata,”
BusinessWeek, January 14, 2008, pp. 33–34; Robyn
Meredith, “The Next People’s Car,” Forbes, April 16,
2007, pp. 70–74; Pete Engardo, “The Last Rajah,”
BusinessWeek, August 13, 2007, pp. 46–51.
2. Michael Elliott, “The New Global Opportunity, Fortune,
July 5, 2010, pp. 96–102.
3. Alex Taylor III, “The New Motor City,” Fortune, October
27, 2008, pp. 166–172.
4. David Kiley, “Baseball, Apple Pie . . . and Mihindra?”
BusinessWeek, November 5, 2007, pp. 61–63.
5. Michael Arndt, “Invasion of the Guatemalan Chicken,”
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 22 and 29, 2010,
pp. 72–73.
6. Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York:
Free Press, 1980), p. 275.
7. Alex Taylor III, “Hyundai Smokes the Competition,”
Fortune, January 18, 2010, pp. 62–71; Moon Ihlwan
and David Kiley, “Hyundai Gains with Marketing Blitz,
BusinessWeek, September 17, 2009; Moon Ihlwan and
David Kiley,” “Hyundai Floors It in the U.S.,”
BusinessWeek, February 27, 2009, pp. 30–31.
8. Charles P. Wallace, “Charge!” Fortune, September 28,
1998, pp. 189–96; World Trade Organization, www.
wto.org.
9. For a comprehensive treatment, see Philip R. Cateora,
Mary C. Gilly, and John L. Graham, International
Marketing (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2009).

12. Michael R. Czinkota and Ilkka A. Ronkainen,
International Marketing, 9th ed. (Cincinnati, OH: SouthWestern Cengage Learning, 2010).

15. According to the CIA World Factbook
(www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook/ index.html), there are 34 developed
countries: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bermuda, Canada, Denmark, Faroe Islands, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, San Marino, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and United
States. They note that DCs are similar to the new
International Monetary Fund (IMF) term “advanced
economies” that adds Hong Kong, South Korea,
Singapore, and Taiwan but drops Malta, Mexico,
South Africa, and Turkey.
16. Satish Shankar, Charles Ormiston, Nicolas Bloch,
Robert Schaus, and Vijay Vishwanath, “How to Win in
Emerging Markets,” MIT Sloan Management Review
(April 2008).
17. “Kraft Revamps Developing Markets after Cadbury,”
Reuters, June 30, 2010; Ned Douthat, “Tupperware
Seals Up Growth in Emerging Markets,” Forbes,
www.forbes.com, April 21, 2010.
18. Tom Mulier and Shin Pei, “Nestle’s $28.1 Billion
Payday Gives Google-Size Cash,” Bloomberg
BusinessWeek, June 30, 2010.
19. “World Population to Exceed 9 Billion by 2050,” press
release, United Nations, www.un.org, March 11, 2009;
“2008 World Population Data Sheet,” Population
Reference Bureau, www.pbr.org.
20. Adapted from Vijay Mahajan, Marcos V. Pratini De
Moraes, and Jerry Wind, “The Invisible Global Market,”
Marketing Management (Winter 2000), pp. 31–35. See
also, Joseph Johnson and Gerard J. Tellis, “Drivers of
Success for Market Entry into China and India,” Journal
of Marketing 72 (May 2008), pp. 1–13; Tarun Khanna
and Krishna G. Palepu, “Emerging Giants: Building
Endnotes

E63

World-Class Companies in Developing Countries,”
Harvard Business Review, October 2006, pp. 60–69.
21. C. K. Prahalad, The Fortune at the Bottom of the
Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty through Profits (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2005);
Niraj Dawar and Amitava Chattopadhyay, “Rethinking
Marketing Programs for Emerging Markets,” Long
Range Planning 35 (October 2002).
22. Bart J. Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Sanjay
Dhar, “Consumer Packaged Goods in the United
States: National Brands, Local Branding,” Journal of
Marketing Research 44 (February 2007), pp. 4–13; Bart
J. Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Sanjay Dhar,
“National Brands, Local Branding: Conclusions and
Future Research Opportunities,” Journal of Marketing
Research 44 (February 2007), pp. 26–28; Bart J.
Bronnenberg, Sanjay K. Dhar, and Jean-Pierre Dubé,
“Brand History, Geography, and the Persistence of
CPG Brand Shares,” Journal of Political Economy
117 (February 2009), pp. 87–115.
23. David Michael and Arindam Bhattacharya, “The BCG
50 Local Dynamos: How Dynamic RDE-Based
Companies Are Mastering Their Home Markets—and
What MNCs Need to Learn from Them,” Boston
Consulting Group, BCG Report, March 2008; “The
Stay-at-Home Giants,” Economist, March 15, 2008,
p. 78; “In Emerging Markets ‘Local Dynamos’ Are
Challenging Big Multinationals,” Manufacturing &
Technology News, April 17, 2008.
24. Manjeet Kripalani, “Finally, Coke Gets It Right,”
BusinessWeek, February 10, 2003, p. 47; Manjeet
Kripalani, “Battling for Pennies in India’s Villages,”
BusinessWeek, June 10, 2002, p. 22.
25. Carlos Niezen and Julio Rodriguez, “Distribution
Lessons from Mom and Pop,” Harvard Business
Review, April 2008; “Sweet Surrender: Can Kraft’s
Cadbury Acquisition Help It Tap the Indian Market?”
Knowledge@Wharton, February 25, 2010.
26. Clayton M. Christensen, Stephen Wunker, and Hari Nair,
“Innovation vs. Poverty,” Forbes, October 13, 2008.
27. Ellen Byron, “P&G’s Global Target: Shelves of Tiny
Stores,” Wall Street Journal, July 16, 2007; “Not So
Fizzy,” Economist, February 23, 2002, pp. 66–67;
Rajeev Batra, Venkatram Ramaswamy, Dana L. Alden,
Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, and S. Ramachander,
“Effects of Brand Local and Nonlocal Origin on
Consumer Attitudes in Developing Countries,” Journal
of Consumer Psychology 9 (2000), pp. 83–95.
28. Bruce Einhorn, “Grudge Match in China,”
BusinessWeek, April 2, 2007, pp. 42–43; Russell
Flannery, “Watch Your Back,” Forbes, April 23, 2007,
pp. 104–5; Steve Hamm and Dexter Roberts, “China’s
First Global Capitalist,” BusinessWeek, December 11,
2006, pp. 52–57; “The Fast and the Furious,”
Economist, November 25, 2006, pp. 63–64.
29. Jenny Mero, “John Deere’s Farm Team,” Fortune, April
14, 2008, pp. 119–24.
30. Peter J. Williamson and Ming Zeng, “Value for Money
Strategies for Recessionary Times,” Harvard Business
E64

Endnotes

Review, March 2009, pp. 66–74; Vikram Skula,
“Business Basics at the Base of the Pyramid,” Harvard
Business Review, June 2008, pp. 53–57.
31. Johny K. Johansson, “Global Marketing: Research on
Foreign Entry, Local Marketing, Global Management,”
Bart Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of
Marketing (London: Sage, 2002), pp. 457–83.
32. Jennifer Cirillo, “Western Europe Is Buzzing,” Beverage
World, June 2010, pp. 22–24.
33. Bernard Condon, “Babble Rouser,” Forbes, August 11,
2008, pp. 72–77.
34. Bechtel, www.bechtel.com/overview.html; Jack Ewing,
“Bechtel Drives a Highway through the Heart of
Transylvania,” BusinessWeek, January 7, 2008.
35. For an academic review, see Leonidas C. Leonidou,
Constantine S. Katsikeas, and Nigel F. Piercy,
“Identifying Managerial Influences on Exporting: Past
Research and Future Directions,” Journal of International
Marketing 6 (Summer 1998), pp. 74–102.
36. Karen Cho, “KFC China’s Recipe for Success,” Forbes
India, October 28, 2009; “Brands annual report 2009,”
Yum! www.yum.com/annualreport/pdf/
2009AnnualReport. pdf; Michael Arndt and Dexter
Roberts, “A Finger-Lickin’ Good Time in China,”
BusinessWeek, October 30, 2006, p. 50; “Cola down
Mexico Way,” Economist, October 11, 2003, pp. 69–70.
37. Claudia H. Deutsch, “The Venturesome Giant,” New
York Times, October 5, 2007.
38. Vikram Mahidhar, Craig Giffi, and Ajit Kambil with Ryan
Alvanos, “Rethinking Emerging Market Strategies,”
Deloitte Review, Issue 4, 2009.
39. “Burgers and Fries a la Francaise,” Economist, April
17, 2004, pp. 60–61; Johny K. Johansson, “Global
Marketing: Research on Foreign Entry, Local
Marketing, Global Management,” Bart Weitz and
Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing
(London: Sage, 2002), pp. 457–83; Shaoming Zou
and S. Tamer Cavusgil, “The GMS: A Broad
Conceptualization of Global Marketing Strategy and
Its Effect on Firm Performance,” Journal of Marketing
66 (October 2002), pp. 40–56; “What Makes a
Company Great?” Fortune, October 26, 1998, pp.
218–26; Bernard Wysocki Jr., “The Global Mall: In
Developing Nations, Many Youths Splurge, Mainly on
U.S. Goods,” Wall Street Journal, June 26,1997;
David M. Szymanski, Sundar G. Bharadwaj, and P.
Rajan Varadarajan, “Standardization versus
Adaptation of International Marketing Strategy: An
Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Marketing 57
(October 1993), pp.1–17; Theodore Levitt, “The
Globalization of Markets,” Harvard Business Review,
May–June 1983, pp. 92–102.
40. Gail Edmondson, “Skoda Means Quality. Really,”
BusinessWeek, October 1, 2007, p. 46. Some of the
more popular jokes from the past: “How do you double
the value of a Škoda? Fill up the gas tank.” “What do
you call a Skoda with a sunroof? A dumpster.” and
“Why do you need a rear-window defroster on a
Skoda? To keep your hands warm when pushing it.”

41. For some research method issues in adapting
surveys to different cultures, see Martijn G. de Jong,
Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, and Bernard P.
Veldkamp, “A Model for the Construction of CountrySpecific Yet Internationally Comparable Short-Form
Marketing Scales,” Marketing Science 28 (July–August
2009), pp. 674–89.
42. Nigel Hollis, The Global Brand (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008); Nigel Hollis, “Going Global? Better
Think Local Instead,” Brandweek, December 1, 2008,
p. 14.
43. “U.S. Soft Drink Consumption on the Decline,”
Reuters, August 24, 2009; The Economist: Pocket
World in Figures (Profile Books: London, 2009).
44. For some recent examples, see Ana Valenzuela,
Barbara Mellers, and Judi Stebel, “Pleasurable
Surprises: A Cross-Cultural Study of Consumer
Responses to Unexpected Incentives,” Journal of
Consumer Research 36 (February 2010), pp. 792–805;
Tuba Üstüner and Douglas B. Holt, “Toward a Theory of
Status Consumption in Less Industrialized Countries,”
Journal of Consumer Research 37 (June 2010), pp.
37–56; Praveen K. Kopalle, Donald R. Lehmann, and
John U. Farley, “Consumer Expectations and Culture:
The Effect of Belief in Karma in India,” Journal of
Consumer Research 37 (August 2010), pp. 251–63.
45. Geert Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences (Beverley
Hills, CA: Sage, 1980).
46. D. A. Aaker and Erich Joachimsthaler, “The Lure of
Global Branding,” Harvard Business Review, 37
(November 1999), pp. 137–44.
47. For some in-depth treatments of branding in Asia in
particular, see S. Ramesh Kumar, Marketing & Branding:
The Indian Scenario (Delhi: Pearson Education, 2007);
Martin Roll, Asian Brand Strategy: How Asia Builds
Strong Brands (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2006);
Paul Temporal, Branding in Asia: The Creation,
Development, and Management of Asian Brands for the
Global Market (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2001).
48. Michael Arnt, “Knock Knock, It’s Your Big Mac,”
BusinessWeek, July 23, 2007, p. 36; Lulu Raghavan,
“Lessons from the Maharaja Mac: Five Rules for
Entering the Indian Market,” Landor Associates,
www.landor.com, December 2007.
49. Deepa Chandrasekaran and Gerard J. Tellis, “Global
Takeoff of New Products: Culture, Wealth, or
Vanishing Differences?” Marketing Science 27
(September–October 2008), pp. 844–60.

53. Ralf van der Lans, Joseph A. Cote, Catherine A. Cole,
Siew Meng Leong, Ale Smidts, Pamela W. Henderson,
Christian Bluemelhuber, Paul A. Bottomley, John R.
Doyle, Alexander Fedorikhin, Janakiraman Moorthy, B.
Ramaseshan, and Bernd H. Schmitt,” Cross-National
Logo Evaluation Analysis: An Individual-Level
Approach,” Marketing Science 28 (September–October
2009), pp. 968–85.
54. F. C. (Frank) Hong, Anthony Pecotich, and Clifford J.
Shultz II, “Language Constraints, Product Attributes,
and Consumer Perceptions in East and Southeast
Asia,” Journal of International Marketing 10 (June
2002), pp. 29–45.
55. Mark Lasswell, “Lost in Translation,” Business 2.0,
August 2004, pp. 68–70; Richard P. Carpenter and the
Globe Staff, “What They Meant to Say Was . . .,”
Boston Globe, August 2, 1998.
56. For an interesting distinction based on the concept of
global consumer culture positioning, see Dana L.
Alden, Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, and Rajeev
Batra, “Brand Positioning through Advertising in Asia,
North America, and Europe: The Role of Global
Consumer Culture,” Journal of Marketing 63 (January
1999), pp. 75–87.
57. Thomas J. Madden, Kelly Hewett, and Martin S. Roth,
“Managing Images in Different Cultures: A CrossNational Study of Color Meanings and Preferences,”
Journal of International Marketing 8 (Winter 2000),
pp. 90–107; Zeynep Gürhan-Canli and Durairaj
Maheswaran, “Cultural Variations in Country-of-Origin
Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 37 (August
2000), pp. 309–17.
58. Geoffrey Fowler, Brian Steinberg, and Aaron O. Patrick,
“Globalizing Apple’s Ads,” Wall Street Journal, March
1, 2007; Joan Voight, “Best Campaign of the Year:
Apple “Mac vs. PC,” Adweek, July 17, 2007.
59. See, for example, Haksin Chan, Lisa C. Wan, and Leo
Y. M. Shin, “The Contrasting Effects of Culture on
Consumer Tolerance: Interpersonal Face and
Impersonal Fate,” Journal of Consumer Research 36
(August 2009), pp. 292–304.
60. Aradhna Krishna and Rohini Ahluwalia, “Language
Choice in Advertising to Bilinguals: Asymmetric
Effects for Multinationals versus Local Firms,” Journal
of Consumer Research 35 (December 2008),
pp. 692–705.
61. Normandy Madden, “Crossing Borders by Building
Relationships,” Advertising Age, October 13, 2008, p. 32.

50. Leila Abboud, “Philips Widens Marketing Push in
India,” Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2009.

62. Preeti Khicha, “Building Brands in Rural India,”
Brandchannel, www.brandchannel.com, October 8, 2007.

51. Walter J. Keegan and Mark C. Green, Global
Marketing, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2005); Warren J. Keegan, Global Marketing
Management, 7th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2002).

63. John L. Graham, Alma T. Mintu, and Waymond Rogers,
“Explorations of Negotiations Behaviors in Ten Foreign
Cultures Using a Model Developed in the United States,”
Management Science 40 (January 1994), pp. 72–95.

52. Paulo Prada and Bruce Orwall, “A Certain ‘Je Ne Sais
Quoi’ at Disney’s New Park,” Wall Street Journal,
March 12, 2003.

64. Price perceptions may differ too, see Lisa E. Bolton,
Hean Tat Keh, and Joseph W. Alba, “How Do Price
Fairness Perceptions Differ Across Culture?” Journal of
Marketing Research 47 (June 2010), pp. 564–76.
Endnotes

E65

65. David Pierson, “Beijing Loves IKEA—But Not for
Shopping,” Los Angeles Times, August 25, 2009; Mei
Fong, “IKEA Hits Home in China: The Swedish Design
Giant, Unlike Other Retailers, Slashes Prices for the
Chinese,” Wall Street Journal, March 3, 2006, p. B1.
66. Companies often fight back, however, and legally
contest the imposition of any duties. After several
years, the Chinese government was eventually able to
overturn the duties slapped on the off-road tire
makers. See “Commerce Finds Unfair Dumping of
Off-Road Tires from China,” International Trade
Association, February 6, 2008; “Ministry: China
Pleased U.S. Overturned Duties on its Off-Road Tires,”
People’s Daily, August 17, 2010.
67. AGMA, “KPMG/AGMA Survey Projects Global ‘Global
Market’ of $58 Billion for Information Technology
Manufacturers,” KPMG, www.kpmg.com, December
11, 2008.
68. David Blanchard, “Just in Time—How to Fix a Leaky
Supply Chain,” IndustryWeek, May 1, 2007.
69. Kersi D. Antia, Mark E. Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and
Robert J. Fisher, “How Does Enforcement Deter Gray
Market Incidence?” Journal of Marketing 70 (January
2006), pp. 92–106; Matthew B. Myers and David A.
Griffith, “Strategies for Combating Gray Market
Activity,” Business Horizons 42 (November–December
1999), pp. 2–8.
70. Brian Grow, Chi-Chu Tschang, Cliff Edwards, and Brian
Burnsed, “Dangerous Fakes,” BusinessWeek, October
8, 2008; Brian Burnsed, “The Most Counterfeited
Products,” Businessweek, www.businessweek. com,
October 8, 2008.
71. “IPR Seizure Statistics,” US Department of Homeland
Security, www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/trade/priority_trade/
ipr/pubs/seizure/, December 9, 2010.
72. Eric Shine, “Faking Out the Fakers,” BusinessWeek,
June 4, 2007, pp. 76–80.
73. Deborah Kong, “Smart Tech Fights Fakes,” Business 2.0,
March 2007, p. 30.
74. David Arnold, “Seven Rules of International Distribution,”
Harvard Business Review, November–December 2000,
pp. 131–37.
75. Ibid.
76. Katrijn Gielens, Linda M. Van De Gucht, Jan-Benedict
E.M. Steenkamp, and Marnik G. Dekimpe, “Dancing
with a Giant: The Effect of Wal-Mart’s Entry into the
United Kingdom on the Performance of European
Retailers,” Journal of Marketing Research 45 (October
2008), pp. 519–34.
77. Noreen O’Leary, “Infiniti Plays Up Japanese Heritage in
Global Campaign,” Brandweek, February 15, 2010, p. 5.
78. “The Shock of Old,” Economist, July 13, 2002, p. 49.
79. “From Fantasy Worlds to Food,” Economist, November
11, 2006, p. 73; “A New Sort of Beauty Contest,”
Economist, November 11, 2006, p. 68.
80. Flora Bagenal and John Harlow, “Borat Make Benefit
Kazakh Tourist Boom,” Sunday Times, December 3,
2006; Lisa Minot, “Borat Causes Tourism Boom,” The
E66

Endnotes

Sun, March 5, 2007; “Borat ‘Boosted Kazakh Tourism,’”
ABC News, www.abc.net.au, November 13, 2008.
81. Jim Rendon, “When Nations Need a Little Marketing,”
New York Times, November 23, 2003.
82. Joanna Kakissis, “Vacationers Rethink Greece Amid Debt
Crisis,” National Public Radio, www.npr.org, June 22,
2010; Elena Becatoros, “Greece’s Tourism Industry Under
Threat,” MSNBC, www.msnbc.com, June 15, 2010.
83. Zeynep Gurhan-Canli and Durairaj Maheswaran,
“Cultural Variations in Country-of-Origin Effects,”
Journal of Marketing Research 37 (August 2000),
pp. 309–17. For some different related issues, see also
Lily Dong and Kelly Tian, “The Use of Western Brands
in Asserting Chinese National Identity,” Journal of
Consumer Research 36 (October 2009), pp. 504–23;
Yinlong Zhang and Adwait Khare, “The Impact of
Accessible Identities on the Evaluation of Global
versus Local Products,” Journal of Consumer
Research 36 (October 2009), pp. 524–37; Rohit Varman
and Russell W. Belk, “Nationalism and Ideology in an
Anticonsumption Movement,” Journal of Consumer
Research 36 (December 2009), pp. 686–700.
84. Douglas B. Holt, John A. Quelch, and Earl L. Taylor,
“How Global Brands Compete,” Harvard Business
Review 82, September 2004, pp. 68–75; Jan-Benedict
E. M. Steenkamp, Rajeev Batra, and Dana L. Alden,
“How Perceived Brand Globalness Creates Brand
Value,” Journal of International Business Studies 34
(January 2003), pp. 53–65.
85. Gürhan-Canli and Maheswaran “Cultural Variations in
Country-of-Origin Effects”; Johny K. Johansson,
“Global Marketing: Research on Foreign Entry, Local
Marketing, Global Management,” Barton A. Weitz and
Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London:
Sage, 2002), pp. 457–83; “Old Wine in New Bottles,”
Economist, February 21, 1998, p. 45; Johny K.
Johansson, “Determinants and Effects of the Use of
‘Made in’ Labels,” International Marketing Review (UK)
6 (January 1989), pp. 47–58; Warren J. Bilkey and
Erik Nes, “Country-of-Origin Effects on Product
Evaluations,” Journal of International Business Studies
13 (Spring–Summer 1982), pp. 89–99.
86. Kimberly Weisul, “Why More Are Buying into ‘Buy
Local,’” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 1, 2010,
pp. 57–60.
87. Jathon Sapsford and Norihiko Shirouzo, “Mom, Apple
Pie and . . . Toyota?” Wall Street Journal, May 11,
2006.
88. Kenneth Hein, “Emerging Markets Still Like U.S.
Brands,” Brandweek, April 16, 2007, p. 4.
89. For additional discussion, see “Strengthening
Brand America,” The Burghard Group, www.
strengtheningbrandamerica.com, December 9, 2010.
90. Joel Backaler, “Haier: A Chinese Company That
Innovates,” China Tracker, www.forbes.com, June 17,
2010; Zhang Ruimin, “Voices from China,” Forbes,
September 28, 2009.
91. Rajdeep Grewal, Murali Chandrashekaran, and F.
Robert Dwyer, “Navigating Local Environments with

Global Strategies: A Contingency Model of
Multinational Subsidiary Performance,” Marketing
Science 27 (September–October 2008), pp. 886–902.
Christopher A. Bartlett and Sumantra Ghoshal,
Managing across Borders (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press, 1989).
92. Moon Ihlwan, “The Foreigners at the Top of LG,”
BusinessWeek, December 22, 2008, pp. 56–57.
93. Jim Murphy, “The Jack’s Eye-View on Marketing a
Global Brand Locally,” talk given at The Beverage
Forum, New York, NY, May 20, 2009.
94. Betsy McKay, “Coke Hunts for Talent to Re-Establish Its
Marketing Might,” Wall Street Journal, March 6, 2002.
95. David Kiley, “Ghosn Hits the Accelerator,”
BusinessWeek, May 1, 2008.

Chapter 22
1. Mark Borden and Anya Kamentz, “The Prophet CEO,”
Fast Company, September 2008, pp. 126–29; Tara
Weiss, “Special Report: Going Green,” Forbes.com.
Forbes.com, July 3, 2007; Matthew Grimm,
“Progressive Business,” Brandweek, November 28,
2005, pp. 16–26; Kate Galbraith, “Timberland’s New
Footprint: Recycled Tires,” New York Times, April 3,
2009; Aman Singh, “Timberland’s Smoking Ban: Good
Corporate Citizenship or Overkill?” Forbes, June 3,
2010; Amy Cortese, “Products; Friend of Nature? Let’s
See Those Shoes,” New York Times, March 6, 2007;
Timberland, www.timberland.com.
2. Christopher Vollmer, Always On: Advertising,
Marketing, and Media in an Era of Consumer Control
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008).
3. For additional analysis and discussion, see Philip
Kotler, Hermawan Karatajaya, and Iwan Setiawan,
Marketing 3.0: From Products to Consumers to the
Human Spirit (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010).
4. Devin Leonard, “The New Abnormal,” Bloomberg
BusinessWeek, August 2–August 10, 2010, pp. 50–55;
Noreen O’Leary, “CMOs Face New Reality,” Adweek,
August 11, 2010.
5. John Gerzema and Michael D’Antonio, Spend Shift:
How the Post-Crisis Values Revolution Is Changing the
Way We Buy, Sell, and Live (San Francisco: JosseyBass, 2010).
6. John A. Quelch and Katherine E. Jocz, Greater Good:
How Good Marketing Makes for Better Democracy
(Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2007).
7. Clay Chandler, “Full Speed Ahead,” Fortune, February
7, 2005, pp. 78–84; “What You Can Learn from
Toyota,” Business 2.0, January–February 2005,
pp. 67–72; Keith Naughton, “Red, White, and Bold,”
Newsweek, April 25, 2005, pp. 34–36.
8. For some thoughtful academic perspectives on
marketing strategy and tactics, see Kellogg on
Integrated Marketing, Dawn Iacobucci and Bobby
Calder, eds. (New York: Wiley, 2003); and Kellogg on
Marketing, Dawn Iacobucci, ed. (New York: Wiley,
2001).

9. For a broad historical treatment of marketing thought,
see D. G. Brian Jones and Eric H. Shaw, “A History of
Marketing Thought,” Barton A. Weitz and Robin
Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage,
2002), pp. 39–65; for more specific issues related to
the interface between marketing and sales, see
Christian Homburg, Ove Jensen, and Harley Krohmer,
“Configurations of Marketing and Sales: A Taxonomy,”
Journal of Marketing 72 (March 2008), pp. 133–54.
10. Frederick E. Webster Jr., “Expanding Your Network,”
Marketing Management (Fall 2010), pp. 16–23; Frederick
E. Webster Jr., Alan J. Malter, and Shankar Ganesan,
“Can Marketing Regain Its Seat at the Table?” Marketing
Science Institute Report No. 03-113 (Cambridge, MA:
Marketing Science Institute, 2003); Frederick E. Webster
Jr., “The Role of Marketing and the Firm,” Barton A.
Weitz and Robin Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing
(London: Sage, 2002), pp. 39–65.
11. Jan Wieseke, Michael Ahearne, Son K. Lam, and Rolf
van Dick, “The Role of Leaders in Internal Marketing,”
Journal of Marketing 73 (March 2009), pp. 123–45;
Hamish Pringle and William Gordon, Beyond Manners:
How to Create the Self-Confident Organisation to Live
the Brand (West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons,
2001); John P. Workman Jr., Christian Homburg, and
Kjell Gruner, “Marketing Organization: An Integrative
Framework of Dimensions and Determinants,” Journal
of Marketing 62 (July 1998), pp. 21–41.
12. Grant McKracken, Chief Culture Officer: How to Create
a Living Breathing Corporation (New York: Basic
Books, 2009).
13. Todd Guild, “Think Regionally, Act Locally: Four Steps
to Reaching the Asian Consumer,” McKinsey Quarterly
4 (September 2009), pp. 22–30.
14. “State and Country Quick Facts,” U.S. Census Bureau,
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/12/12086.html.
15. “Category Management Goes beyond Grocery,”
Cannondale Associates White Paper,
www.cannondaleassoc.com, February 13, 2007; Laurie
Freeman, “P&G Widens Power Base: Adds Category
Managers,” Advertising Age; Michael J. Zenor, “The
Profit Benefits of Category Management,” Journal of
Marketing Research 31 (May 1994), pp. 202–13; Gerry
Khermouch, “Brands Overboard,” Brandweek, August
22, 1994, pp. 25–39; Zachary Schiller, “The Marketing
Revolution at Procter & Gamble,” BusinessWeek, July
25, 1988, pp. 72–76.
16. For some further reading on the origins of category
management, see Robert Dewar and Don Shultz, “The
Product Manager, an Idea Whose Time Has Gone,”
Marketing Communications (May 1998), pp. 28–35;
George S. Low and Ronald A. Fullerton, “Brands, Brand
Management, and the Brand Manager System: A Critical
Historical Evaluation,” Journal of Marketing Research 31
(May 1994), pp. 173–90; Michael J. Zanor, “The Profit
Benefits of Category Management,” Journal of Marketing
Research 31 (May 1994), pp. 202–13.
17. D. Gail Fleenor, “The Next Space Optimizer,”
Progressive Grocer, March 2009.
Endnotes

E67

18. Larry Selden and Geoffrey Colvin, Angel Customers &
Demon Customers (New York: Portfolio [Penguin], 2003).
19. For an in-depth discussion of issues around
implementing a customer-based organization on which
much of this paragraph is based, see George S. Day,
“Aligning the Organization with the Market,” MIT Sloan
Management Review 48 (Fall 2006), pp. 41–49.
20. Frederick E. Webster Jr., “The Role of Marketing
and the Firm,” Barton A. Weitz and Robin Wensley,
eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage, 2002),
pp. 39–65.
21. For research on the prevalence of CMOs, see Pravin
Nath and Vijay Mahajan, “Chief Marketing Officers: A
Study of Their Presence in Firms’ Top Management
Teams,” Journal of Marketing 72 (January 2008),
pp. 65–81. For more discussion on the importance of
CMOs, see David A. Aaker, Spanning Silos: The New
CMO Imperative (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 2008).
22. For some classic perspectives, see Benson P. Shapiro,
“Can Marketing and Manufacturing Coexist?” Harvard
Business Review, September– October 1977,
pp. 104–14. Also see Robert W. Ruekert and Orville
C. Walker Jr., “Marketing’s Interaction with Other
Functional Units: A Conceptual Framework with Other
Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Marketing 51 (January
1987), pp. 1–19.
23. For more on creativity, see Pat Fallon and Fred Senn,
Juicing the Orange: How to Turn Creativity into a
Powerful Business Advantage (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 2006); Bob Schmetterer, Leap:
A Revolution in Creative Business Strategy (Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley, 2003); Jean-Marie Dru, Beyond Disruption:
Changing the Rules in the Marketplace (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2002); Michael Michalko, Cracking Creativity:
The Secrets of Creative Genius (Berkeley, CA: Ten
Speed Press, 1998); James M. Higgins, 101 Creative
Problem-Solving Techniques (New York: New
Management Publishing, 1994); and all the books by
Edward DeBono.
24. Gary Hamel, Leading the Revolution (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 2000).
25. Jagdish N. Sheth, The Self-Destructive Habits of Good
Companies . . . And How to Break Them (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2007).
26. William L. Wilkie and Elizabeth S. Moore, “Marketing’s
Relationship to Society,” Barton A. Weitz and Robin
Wensley, eds., Handbook of Marketing (London: Sage,
2002), pp. 1–38.
27. “Special Report: Corporate Social Responsibility,”
Economist, January 17, 2008. For a broader academic
perspective, see Michael E. Porter and Mark R.
Kramer, “Strategy & Society,” Harvard Business Review
(December 2006): 78–82; Clayton M. Christensen,
Heiner Baumann, Rudy Ruggles, and Thomas M.
Stadtler, “Disruption Innovation for Social Change,”
Harvard Business Review (December 2006): 94–101.
28. Walmart, http://walmartstores.com/Sustainability/
7951.aspx; Monte Burke, “Mr. Green Jeans,” Forbes,
E68

Endnotes

May 24, 2010; Brian Grow, “The Debate over Doing
Good,” BusinessWeek, August 15, 2005, pp. 76–78.
29. Brian Grow, “The Debate over Doing Good,”
BusinessWeek, August 15, 2005.
30. MaryLou Costa, “P&G Marketing Boss Urges Brands
to Move Beyond Traditional Advertising,” Marketing
Week, June 24, 2010; Elaine Wong, “P&G Shows Its
Softer Side with Downy Cause Effort,” Brandweek,
February 1, 2010, p. 6; Elaine Wang, “P&G Throws
Values into Value Equation,” Brandweek, March 9,
2009, p. 5.
31. Raj Sisodia, David B. Wolfe, and Jag Sheth, Firms of
Endearment: How World-Class Companies Profit from
Passion and Purpose (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Wharton School Publishing, 2007).
32. Gary Hirshberg, Stirring It Up: How to Make Money and
Save the World (New York: Hyperion, 2008); Marc
Gunther, “Stonyfield Stirs Up the Yogurt Market,
Fortune. www.cnnmoney.com, January 4, 2008;
Melanie D. G. Kaplan, “Stonyfield Farm CEO: How an
Organic Yogurt Business Can Scale,” SmartPlanet,
www.smartplanet.com, May 17, 2010.
33. Elisabeth Sullivan, “Play by the New Rules,” Marketing
News, November 30, 2009, pp. 5–9; For further
reading, see Dorothy Cohen, Legal Issues in Marketing
Decision Making (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western
College Publishing, 1995).
34. Sarah Ellison, “Kraft Limits on Kids’ Ads May Cheese
Off Rivals,” Wall Street Journal, January 13, 2005.
35. Shelby D. Hunt and Scott Vitell, “The General Theory of
Marketing Ethics: A Retrospective and Revision,” John
Quelch and Craig Smith, eds., Ethics in Marketing
(Chicago: Irwin, 1992).
36. “Distrust, Discontent, Anger and Partisan Rancor,” The
Pew Research for the People & the Press, April 18, 2010.
37. Ronald Alsop, “How a Boss’s Deeds Buff a Firm’s
Reputation,” Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2007.
38. Mary Jo Hatch and Majken Schultz, Taking Brand
Initiative: How Companies Can Align Strategy, Culture,
and Identity through Corporate Branding (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2008); Majken Schultz, Yun
Mi Antorini, and Fabian F. Csaba, Corporate Branding:
Purpose, People, and Process (Køge, Denmark:
Copenhagen Business School Press, 2005); Ronald J.
Alsop, The 18 Immutable Laws of Corporate
Reputation: Creating, Protecting, and Repairing Your
Most Valuable Asset (New York: Free Press, 2004);
Marc Gunther, “Tree Huggers, Soy Lovers, and Profits,”
Fortune, June 23, 2003, pp. 98–104; Ronald J. Alsop,
“Perils of Corporate Philanthropy,” Wall Street Journal,
January 16, 2002.
39. Emily Steel, “Nestlé Takes a Beating on Social-Media
Sites,” Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2010, p. B5; Mya
Frazier, “Going Green? Plant Deep Roots,” Advertising
Age, April 30, 2007, pp. 1, 54–55.
40. Scott Kirsner, “An Environmental Quandary Percolates
at Green Mountain Coffee Roasters,” Boston Globe,
January 3, 2010; Natalie Zmuda, “Green Mountain

Takes on Coffee Giants Cup by Cup,” Advertising Age,
June 1, 2009, p. 38.
41. Angela M. Eikenberry, “The Hidden Cost of Cause
Marketing,” Stanford Social Innovation Review
(Summer 2009); Aneel Karnani, “The Case Against
Corporate Social Responsibility,” Wall Street Journal,
August 23, 2010.
42. Sandra O’Loughlin, “The Wearin’ o’ the Green,”
Brandweek, April 23, 2007, pp. 26–27. For a critical
response, see also, John R. Ehrenfield, “Feeding the
Beast,” Fast Company, December 2006–January 2007,
pp. 42–43.
43. Pete Engardio, “Beyond the Green Corporation,”
BusinessWeek, January 29, 2007, pp. 50–64.
44. Global 100, www.global100.org.
45. Pete Engardio, “Beyond the Green Corporation,”
BusinessWeek, January 29, 2007, pp. 50–64.
46. Noreen O’ Leary, “Marketer of the Year: Jessica
Buttimer,” Next, September 14, 2009, p. 32; Jack
Neff, “Marketing 50: Green Works (Jessica Buttimer),
Advertising Age, November 17, 2008, p. S-2; Elaine
Wong, “CPGs Watch as Clorox Crashes the Green
Party,” Brandweek, April 21, 2008, p. 13; Anya
Kamenetz, “Cleaning Solution,” Fast Company,
September 2008, pp. 121–25.
47. David Roberts, “Another Inconvenient Truth,” Fast
Company, March 2008, p. 70; Melanie Warner, “P&G’s
Chemistry Test,” Fast Company, July/August 2008,
pp. 71–74.
48. Mark Dolliver, “Thumbs Down on Corporate Green
Efforts,” Adweek, August 31, 2010; Betsy Cummings,
“A Green Backlash Gains Momentum,” Brandweek,
March 3, 2008, p. 6; Michael Hopkins, “What the
‘Green’ Consumer Wants,” MIT Sloan Management
Review (Summer 2009), pp. 87–89. For some related
consumer research, see Julie R. Irwin and Rebecca
Walker Naylor, “Ethical Decisions and Response Mode
Compatibility: Weighting of Ethical Attributes in
Consideration Sets Formed by Excluding versus
Including Product Alternatives,” Journal of Marketing
Research 46 (April 2009), pp. 234–46.
49. Jack Neff, “Green-Marketing Revolution Defies
Economic Downturn,” Advertising Age, April 20, 2009,
pp. 1, 23; Ram Nidumolu, C. K. Prahalad, and M. R.
Rangaswami, “Why Sustainability Is Now the Key
Driver of Innovation,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2009, p. 57.
50. John A. Quelch and Nathalie Laidler-Kylander, The
New Global Brands: Managing Non-Government
Organizations in the 21st Century (Mason, OH:
South-Western, 2006); Philip Kotler and Nancy Lee,
Corporate Social Responsibility: Doing the Most
Good for Your Company and Your Cause (New York:
Wiley, 2005); Lynn Upshaw, Truth: The New Rules for
Marketing in a Skeptical World (New York: AMACOM,
2007).
51. Newman’s Own Foundation, www.newmansown
foundation.org; Paul Newman and A. E. Hotchner,
Shameless Exploitation in Pursuit of the Common

Good: The Madcap Business Adventure by the Truly
Oddest Couple (Waterville, ME: Thorndike Press, 2003).
52. “U.S. Charitable Giving Falls 3.6 Percent in 2009 to
$303.75 Billion,” Giving USA 2010 Report, June 9,
2010.
53. Robert Berner, “Smarter Corporate Giving,”
BusinessWeek, November 28, 2005, pp. 68–76; Craig
N. Smith, “Corporate Social Responsibility: Whether or
How?” California Management Review 45 (Summer
2003), pp. 52–76.
54. Larry Chiagouris and Ipshita Ray, “Saving the World
with Cause-Related Marketing,” Marketing
Management 16 (July–August 2007), pp. 48–51;
Hamish Pringle and Marjorie Thompson, Brand Spirit:
How Cause-Related Marketing Builds Brands (New
York: Wiley, 1999); Sue Adkins, Cause-Related
Marketing: Who Cares Wins (Oxford, England:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999); “Marketing, Corporate
Social Initiatives, and the Bottom Line,” Marketing
Science Institute Conference Summary, MSI Report
No. 01-106, 2001.
55. Rajan Varadarajan and Anil Menon, “Cause-Related
Marketing: A Co-Alignment of Marketing Strategy and
Corporate Philanthropy,” Journal of Marketing 52 (July
1988), pp. 58–74.
56. Minette Drumwright and Patrick E. Murphy, “Corporate
Societal Marketing,” Paul N. Bloom and Gregory T.
Gundlach, eds., Handbook of Marketing and Society
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001), pp. 162–83. See
also, Minette Drumwright, “Company Advertising with a
Social Dimension: The Role of Noneconomic Criteria,”
Journal of Marketing 60 (October 1996), pp. 71–87.
57. C. B. Bhattacharya, Sankar Sen and Daniel Korschun,
“Using Corporate Social Responsibility to Win the War
for Talent,” MIT Sloan Management Review 49 (January
2008), pp. 37–44; Xueming Luo and C. B. Bhattacharya,
“Corporate Social Responsibility, Customer Satisfaction,
and Market Value,” Journal of Marketing 70 (October
2006), pp. 1–18; Pat Auger, Paul Burke, Timothy
Devinney, and Jordan J. Louviere, “What Will
Consumers Pay for Social Product Features?” Journal
of Business Ethics 42 (February 2003), pp. 281–304;
Dennis B. Arnett, Steve D. German, and Shelby D. Hunt,
“The Identity Salience Model of Relationship Marketing
Success: The Case of Nonprofit Marketing,” Journal of
Marketing 67 (April 2003), pp. 89–105; C. B.
Bhattacharya and Sankar Sen, “Consumer-Company
Identification: A Framework for Understanding
Consumers’ Relationships with Companies,” Journal of
Marketing 67 (April 2003), pp. 76–88; Sankar Sen and C.
B. Bhattacharya, “Does Doing Good Always Lead to
Doing Better? Consumer Reactions to Corporate Social
Responsibility,” Journal of Marketing Research 38 (May
2001), pp. 225–44.
58. Paul N. Bloom, Steve Hoeffler, Kevin Lane Keller, and
Carlos E. Basurto, “How Social-Cause Marketing
Affects Consumer Perceptions,” MIT Sloan Management
Review (Winter 2006), pp. 49–55; Carolyn J. Simmons
and Karen L. Becker-Olsen, “Achieving Marketing
Endnotes

E69

Objectives through Social Sponsorships,” Journal of
Marketing 70 (October 2006), pp. 154–69; Guido Berens,
Cees B. M. van Riel, and Gerrit H. van Bruggen,
“Corporate Associations and Consumer Product
Responses: The Moderating Role of Corporate Brand
Dominance,” Journal of Marketing 69 (July 2005), pp.
35–48; Donald R. Lichtenstein, Minette E. Drumwright,
and Bridgette M. Braig, “The Effect of Social
Responsibility on Customer Donations to CorporateSupported Nonprofits,” Journal of Marketing 68
(October 2004), pp. 16–32; Stephen Hoeffler and Kevin
Lane Keller, “Building Brand Equity through Corporate
Societal Marketing,” Journal of Public Policy and
Marketing 21 (Spring 2002), pp. 78–89. See also,
Special Issue: Corporate Responsibility, Journal of
Brand Management 10, nos. 4–5 (May 2003).
59. Mark R. Forehand and Sonya Grier, “When Is Honesty
the Best Policy? The Effect of Stated Company Intent
on Consumer Skepticism,” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 13 (2003), pp. 349–56; Dwane Hal Dean,
“Associating the Corporation with a Charitable Event
through Sponsorship: Measuring the Effects on
Corporate Community Relations,” Journal of
Advertising 31 (Winter 2002), pp. 77–87.
60. Susan Perry, “KFC-Komen ‘Buckets for the Cure’
Campaign Raises Questions,” MinnPost.com.
www.minnpost.com, April 20, 2010; Chuck English,
“Cause Splash vs. Cause Marketing,” Doing Good for
Business, www.doinggoodforbusiness.wordpress.com,
May 17, 2010; Nancy Schwartz, “Busted Nonprofit
Brand: Anatomy of a Corporate Sponsorship Meltdown
(Case Study),” Getting Attention! www.gettingattention.
org, April 28, 2010.
61. “Nike Announces Global Expansion of LIVESTRONG
Product Collection as Lance Armstrong Rides for
Hope,” Nike. www.nike.com, June 30, 2010; Reena
Jana, “Nike Goes Green. Very Quietly,” BusinessWeek,
June 22, 2009, p. 56.
62. Mya Frazier, “Costly Red Campaign Reaps Meager $18
Million,” Advertising Age, March 5, 2007; Viewpoint:
Bobby Shriver, “CEO: Red’s Raised Lots of Green,”
Advertising Age, March 12, 2007; Michelle Conlin,
“Shop (in the Name of Love),” BusinessWeek, October
2, 2006, p. 9.
63. Todd Cohen, “Corporations Aim for Strategic
Engagement,” Philanthropy Journal, September 20,
2006; John A. Quelch and Nathalie Laidler-Kylander,
The New Global Brands: Managing NonGovernmental Organizations in the 21st Century
(Cincinnati, OH: South-Western, 2005).
64. Ronald J. Alsop, The 18 Immutable Laws of Corporate
Reputation: Creating, Protecting, and Repairing Your
Most Valuable Asset (New York: Free Press, 2004),
p. 125.
65. Ronald McDonald House Charities, www.rmhc.org.
66. Susan Orenstein, “The Selling of Breast Cancer,”
Business 2.0, February 2003, pp. 88–94; H. Meyer,
“When the Cause Is Just,” Journal of Business Strategy
20 (November–December 1999), pp. 27–31.

E70

Endnotes

67. Christine Bittar, “Seeking Cause and Effect,”
Brandweek, November 11, 2002, pp. 18–24.
68. Paula Andruss, “‘Think Pink’ Awareness Much Higher
Than Threat,” Marketing News, February 15, 2006,
pp. 14–16; Jessi Hempel, “Selling a Cause, Better
Make It Pop,” BusinessWeek, February 13, 2006,
p. 75; Elizabeth Woyke, “Prostate Cancer’s Higher
Profile,” BusinessWeek, October 9, 2006, p. 14.
69. One Sight, www.onesight.org.
70. Christina Binkley, “Charity Gives Shoe Brand Extra
Shine,” Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2010; “How I Got
Started . . . Blake Mycoskie, Founder of TOMS
Shoes,” Fortune, March 22, 2010, p. 72; Dan Heath
and Chip Heath, “An Arms Race of Goodness,” Fast
Company, October 2009, pp. 82–83; Toms,
www.toms.com/movement-one-for-one.
71. Philip Kotler and Nancy Lee, Social Marketing:
Influencing Behaviors for Good (Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage, 2008); Alan Andreasen, Social Marketing in the
21st Century (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2006);
Michael L. Rothschild, “Carrots, Sticks, and Promises:
A Conceptual Framework for the Management of
Public Health and Social Issue Behaviors,” Journal of
Marketing 63 (October 1999), pp. 24–37.
72. See Michael L. Rothschild, “Carrots, Sticks, and
Promises: A Conceptual Framework for the
Management of Public Health and Social Issue
Behaviors,” Journal of Marketing 63 (October 1999),
pp. 24–37. For an application, see Sekar Raju, Priyali
Rajagopal, and Timothy J. Gilbride, “Marketing
Healthful Eating to Children: The Effectiveness of
Incentives, Pledges, and Competitions,” Journal of
Marketing 74 (May 2010), pp. 93–106.
73. For some relevant recent academic research on
developing social marketing programs, see Deborah
A. Small and Nicole M. Verrochi, “The Face of
Need: Facial Emotion Expression on Charity
Advertisements,” Journal of Marketing Research 46
(December 2009), pp. 777–87; Katherine White and
John Peloza, “Self-Benefit versus Other-Benefit
Marketing Appeals: Their Effectiveness in Generating
Charitable Support,” Journal of Marketing 73 (July
2009), pp. 109–24; Merel Van Diepen, Bas Donkers
and Philip Hans Franses, “Dynamic and Competitive
Effects of Direct Mailings: A Charitable Giving
Application,” Journal of Marketing Research 46
(February 2009), pp. 120–33; Jen Shang, Americus
Reed II, and Rachel Croson, “Identity Congruency
Effects on Donations,” Journal of Marketing Research
45 (June 2008), pp. 351–61.
74. For more on developing and implementing marketing
plans, see H. W. Goetsch, Developing, Implementing,
and Managing an Effective Marketing Plan (Chicago:
NTC Business Books, 1993). See also, Thomas V.
Bonoma, The Marketing Edge: Making Strategies
Work (New York: Free Press, 1985). Much of this
section is based on Bonoma’s work.
75. For other examples, see Paul W. Farris, Neil T. Bendle,
Phillip E. Pfeifer, and David J. Reibstein, Marketing

Metrics: 50+ Metrics Every Executive Should Master
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing,
2006); John Davis, Measuring Marketing: 103 Key
Metrics Every Marketer Needs (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley,
2006).
76. Sam R. Goodman, Increasing Corporate Profitability
(New York: Ronald Press, 1982), chapter 1. See also,
Bernard J. Jaworski, Vlasis Stathakopoulos, and H.
Shanker Krishnan, “Control Combinations in
Marketing: Conceptual Framework and Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Marketing 57 (January 1993),
pp. 57–69.
77. Philip Kotler, William Gregor, and William Rodgers,
“The Marketing Audit Comes of Age,” Sloan
Management Review 30 (Winter 1989),
pp. 49–62; Frederick Reichheld, The Loyalty Effect
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1996)
discusses attrition of the figures.
78. Useful checklists for a marketing self-audit can be
found in Aubrey Wilson, Aubrey Wilson’s Marketing
Audit Checklists (London: McGraw-Hill, 1982); Mike
Wilson, The Management of Marketing (Westmead,
England: Gower Publishing, 1980). A marketing audit
software program is described in Ben M. Enis and
Stephen J. Garfein, “The Computer-Driven Marketing
Audit,” Journal of Management Inquiry 1 (December
1992), pp. 306–18.
79. Philip Kotler, William Gregor, and William Rodgers,
“The Marketing Audit Comes of Age,” Sloan
Management Review 30 (Winter 1989), pp. 49–62.
80. Alfred R. Oxenfeldt, “How to Use Market-Share
Measurement,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1969, pp. 59–68.
81. There is a one-half chance that a successive
observation will be higher or lower. Therefore, the
probability of finding six successively higher values is
given by 1/2 to the sixth, or 1/64.
82. Alternatively, companies need to focus on factors
affecting shareholder value. The goal of marketing
planning is to increase shareholder value, which is the
present value of the future income stream created by
the company’s present actions. Rate-of-return analysis
usually focuses on only one year’s results. See, Alfred

Rapport, Creating Shareholder Value, rev. ed. (New
York: Free Press, 1997).
83. For additional reading on financial analysis, see Peter
L. Mullins, Measuring Customer and Product-Line
Profitability (Washington, DC: Distribution Research
and Education Foundation, 1984).
84. Robin Cooper and Robert S. Kaplan, “Profit Priorities
from Activity-Based Costing,” Harvard Business
Review, May–June 1991, pp. 130–35; for a recent
application to shipping, see Tom Kelley, “What Is the
Real Cost: How to Use Lifecycle Cost Analysis for an
Accurate Comparison,” Beverage World, January
2010, pp. 50–51.

Appendix
1. Background information and market data adapted from
“Gartner Says Worldwide Mobile Phones Sales Grew
35 Percent in Third Quarter 2010; Smartphone Sales
Increased 96 Percent,” press release, November 18,
2010, www.gartner.com; Joseph Palenchar,
“Smartphone Sales Rise as Selection Grows,” TWICE,
June 21, 2010; Sascha Segan, “Motorola RAZR2: The
RAZR2 Cuts Four Ways,” PC Magazine, October 2,
2007, pp. 32–33; Walter S. Mossberg, “Apple’s iPod
Touch Is a Beauty of a Player Short on Battery Life,”
Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2007, p. B1; “Roam
If You Want To,” PC World, September 2007, p. 134;
Sascha Segam, “Exclusive: One RAZR2, Four Ways to
Cut It,” PC Magazine Online, August 13, 2007,
www.pcmag.com; “Apple Unlikely to Budge Anytime
Soon on iPhone Pricing,” InformationWeek, July 26,
2007; “Smartphones Get Smarter, Thanks in Part to the
iPhone,” InformationWeek, July 21, 2007; “Nine
Alternatives to Apple’s iPhone,”InformationWeek, June
28, 2007; “Hospital Uses PDA App for Patient
Transport,” Health Data Management, June 2007, p.
14; Jessica E. Vascellaro and Pui-Wing Tam, “RIM’s
New Gear Fuels Profit Surge; Palm Sputters,” Wall
Street Journal, June 29, 2007, p. B4; “Smart Phones
Force Dell from Handhelds,” MicroScope, April 23,
2007; “2005 PDA Shipments Set Record,” Business
Communications Review, April 2006, p. 6;
“Smartphone Market Grows Fast Despite Challenges,”
Appliance, March 2006, p. 16.

Endnotes

E71

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary
A
activity-based cost (ABC) accounting procedures that can quantify the true profitability of different activities by identifying their actual costs.

brand audit a consumer-focused exercise that involves a series of
procedures to assess the health of the brand, uncover its sources
of brand equity, and suggest ways to improve and leverage its
equity.

adoption an individual’s decision to become a regular user of a
product.

brand awareness consumers’ ability to identify the brand under
different conditions, as reflected by their brand recognition or recall
performance.

advertising any paid form of nonpersonal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods, or services by an identified sponsor.

brand community a specialized community of consumers and employees whose identification and activities focus around the brand.

advertising objective a specific communications task and
achievement level to be accomplished with a specific audience in a
specific period of time.

brand contact any information-bearing experience a customer or
prospect has with the brand, the product category, or the market that
relates to the marketer’s product or service.

anchoring and adjustment heuristic when consumers arrive at
an initial judgment and then make adjustments of their first impressions based on additional information.

brand development index (BDI) the index of brand sales to category sales.

arm’s-length price the price charged by other competitors for the
same or a similar product.
aspirational groups groups a person hopes or would like to join.
associative network memory model a conceptual representation
that views memory as consisting of a set of nodes and interconnecting links where nodes represent stored information or concepts and
links represent the strength of association between this information
or concepts.
attitude a person’s enduring favorable or unfavorable evaluation,
emotional feeling, and action tendencies toward some object
or idea.
augmented product a product that includes features that go beyond consumer expectations and differentiate the product from
competitors.
available market the set of consumers who have interest, income,
and access to a particular offer.
availability heuristic when consumers base their predictions on
the quickness and ease with which a particular example of an outcome comes to mind.
average cost the cost per unit at a given level of production; it is
equal to total costs divided by production.

B

brand dilution when consumers no longer associate a brand with
a specific product or highly similar products or start thinking less favorably about the brand.
brand elements those trademarkable devices that serve to identify
and differentiate the brand such as a brand name, logo, or character.
brand equity the added value endowed to products and services.
brand extension a company’s use of an established brand to introduce a new product.
brand image the perceptions and beliefs held by consumers, as reflected in the associations held in consumer memory.
brand knowledge all the thoughts, feelings, images, experiences,
beliefs, and so on that become associated with the brand.
brand line all products, original as well as line and category extensions, sold under a particular brand name.
brand mix the set of all brand lines that a particular seller makes
available to buyers.
brand personality the specific mix of human traits that may be attributed to a particular brand.
brand portfolio the set of all brands and brand lines a particular
firm offers for sale to buyers in a particular category.
brand promise the marketer’s vision of what the brand must be and
do for consumers.

backward invention reintroducing earlier product forms that can
be well adapted to a foreign country’s needs.

brand-tracking studies collect quantitative data from consumers
over time to provide consistent, baseline information about how
brands and marketing program are performing.

banner ads (Internet) small, rectangular boxes containing text and
perhaps a picture to support a brand.

brand valuation an estimate of the total financial value of the
brand.

basic product what specifically the actual product is.
belief a descriptive thought that a person holds about something.

brand value chain a structured approach to assessing the sources
and outcomes of brand equity and the manner in which marketing
activities create brand value.

brand a name, term, sign, symbol, or design, or a combination of
them, intended to identify the goods or services of one seller or
group of sellers and to differentiate them from those of competitors.

branded entertainment using sports, music, arts, or other entertainment activities to build brand equity.

brand architecture see branding strategy.

branded variants specific brand lines uniquely supplied to different
retailers or distribution channels.

brand-asset management team (BAMT) key representatives
from functions that affect the brand’s performance.

branding endowing products and services with the power of a brand.

brand associations all brand-related thoughts, feelings, perceptions, images, experiences, beliefs, attitudes, and so on that become
linked to the brand node.

branding strategy the number and nature of common and distinctive brand elements applied to the different products sold by
the firm.
Glossary

G1

breakeven analysis a means by which management estimates how
many units of the product the company would have to sell to break
even with the given price and cost structure.
brick-and-click existing companies that have added an online site
for information and/or e-commerce.
business database complete information about business customers’ past purchases; past volumes, prices, and profits.
business market all the organizations that acquire goods and
services used in the production of other products or services that
are sold, rented, or supplied to others.

C

conjoint analysis a method for deriving the utility values that consumers attach to varying levels of a product’s attributes.
conjunctive heuristic the consumer sets a minimum acceptable
cutoff level for each attribute and chooses the first alternative that
meets the minimum standard for all attributes.
consumer behavior the study of how individuals, groups, and organizations elect, buy, use, and dispose of goods, services, ideas, or
experiences to satisfy their needs and wants.
consumer involvement the level of engagement and active processing undertaken by the consumer in responding to a marketing
stimulus.

capital items long-lasting goods that facilitate developing or managing the finished product.

consumerist movement an organized movement of citizens and
government to strengthen the rights and powers of buyers in relation
to sellers.

captive products products that are necessary to the use of other
products, such as razor blades or film.

consumption system the way the user performs the tasks of getting and using products and related services.

category extension using the parent brand to brand a new product
outside the product category currently served by the parent brand.

containerization putting the goods in boxes or trailers that are easy
to transfer between two transportation modes.

category membership the products or sets of products with which
a brand competes and which function as close substitutes.

contractual sales force manufacturers’ reps, sales agents, and
brokers, who are paid a commission based on sales.

cause-related marketing marketing that links a firm’s contributions to a designated cause to customers’ engaging directly or indirectly in revenue-producing transactions with the firm.

convenience goods goods the consumer purchases frequently, immediately, and with a minimum of effort.

channel conflict when one channel member’s actions prevent the
channel from achieving its goal.
channel coordination when channel members are brought together to advance the goals of the channel, as opposed to their own
potentially incompatible goals.
channel power the ability to alter channel members’ behavior so
that they take actions they would not have taken otherwise.
club membership programs programs open to everyone who purchases a product or service, or limited to an affinity group of those
willing to pay a small fee.
co-branding (also dual branding or brand bundling) two or more
well-known brands are combined into a joint product or marketed
together in some fashion.
cohorts groups of individuals born during the same time period who
travel through life together.

conventional marketing channel an independent producer,
wholesaler(s), and retailer(s).
core benefit the service or benefit the customer is really buying.
core competency attribute that (1) is a source of competitive advantage in that it makes a significant contribution to perceived customer benefits, (2) has applications in a wide variety of markets,
(3) is difficult for competitors to imitate.
core values the belief systems that underlie consumer attitudes and
behavior, and that determine people’s choices and desires over the
long term.
corporate culture the shared experiences, stories, beliefs, and
norms that characterize an organization.
corporate retailing corporately owned retailing outlets that achieve
economies of scale, greater purchasing power, wider brand recognition, and better-trained employees.
countertrade offering other items in payment for purchases.

communication adaptation changing marketing communications
programs for each local market.

critical path scheduling (PS) network planning techniques to coordinate the many tasks in launching a new product.

communication-effect research determining whether an ad is
communicating effectively.

cues stimuli that determine when, where, and how a person
responds.

company demand the company’s estimated share of market demand at alternative levels of company marketing effort in a given
time period.

culture the fundamental determinant of a person’s wants and behavior.

company sales forecast the expected level of company sales based
on a chosen marketing plan and an assumed marketing environment.
competitive advantage a company’s ability to perform in one or
more ways that competitors cannot or will not match.
company sales potential the sales limit approached by company
demand as company marketing effort increases relative to that of
competitors.
conformance quality the degree to which all the produced units
are identical and meet the promised specifications.

G2

Glossary

customer-based brand equity the differential effect that brand
knowledge has on a consumer response to the marketing of that
brand.
customer churn high customer defection.
customer consulting data, information systems, and advice
services that the seller offers to buyers.
customer database an organized collection of comprehensive information about individual customers or prospects that is current,
accessible, and actionable for marketing purposes.
customer equity the sum of lifetime values of all customers.

customer lifetime value (CLV) the net present value of the stream
of future profits expected over the customer’s lifetime purchases.

direct-order marketing marketing in which direct marketers seek
a measurable response, typically a customer order.

customer mailing list a set of names, addresses, and telephone
numbers.

direct product profitability (DDP) a way of measuring a product’s
handling costs from the time it reaches the warehouse until a customer buys it in the retail store.

customer-management organization deals with individual customers rather than the mass market or even market segments.
customer perceived value (CPV) the difference between the
prospective customer’s evaluation of all the benefits and all the costs
of an offering and the perceived alternatives.

discrimination the process of recognizing differences in sets of
similar stimuli and adjusting responses accordingly.
display ads small, rectangular boxes containing text and perhaps a
picture to support a brand.

customer-performance scorecard how well the company is
doing year after year on particular customer-based measures.

dissociative groups those groups whose values or behavior an individual rejects.

customer profitability analysis (CPA) a means of assessing and
ranking customer profitability through accounting techniques such
as activity-based costing (ABC).

distribution programming building a planned, professionally
managed, vertical marketing system that meets the needs of both
manufacturer and distributors.

customer relationship management (CRM) the process of carefully managing detailed information about individual customers and
all customer “touch points” to maximize loyalty.

drive a strong internal stimulus impelling action.

customer training training the customer’s employees to use the
vendor’s equipment properly and efficiently.
customer value analysis report of the company’s strengths and
weaknesses relative to various competitors.
customer-value hierarchy five product levels that must be addressed by marketers in planning a market offering.
customerization combination of operationally driven mass customization with customized marketing in a way that empowers
consumers to design the product and service offering of their
choice.

dual adaptation adapting both the product and the communications to the local market.
dumping situation in which a company charges either less than its
costs or less than it charges in its home market, in order to enter or
win a market.
durability a measure of a product’s expected operating life under
natural or stressful conditions.

E
e-business the use of electronic means and platforms to conduct
a company’s business.
e-commerce a company or site offers to transact or facilitate the
selling of products and services online.

D
data mining the extracting of useful information about individuals,
trends, and segments from the mass of data.

elimination-by-aspects heuristic situation in which the consumer
compares brands on an attribute selected probabilistically, and brands
are eliminated if they do not meet minimum acceptable cutoff levels.

data warehouse a collection of current data captured, organized,
and stored in a company’s contact center.

environmental threat a challenge posed by an unfavorable trend
or development that would lead to lower sales or profit.

database marketing the process of building, maintaining, and
using customer databases and other databases for the purpose of
contacting, transacting, and building customer relationships.

ethnographic research a particular observational research approach that uses concepts and tools from anthropology and other
social science disciplines to provide deep cultural understanding of
how people live and work.

declining demand consumers begin to buy the product less frequently or not at all.
deep metaphors basic frames or orientations that consumers have
toward the world around them.
delivery how well the product or service is delivered to the customer.
demand chain planning the process of designing the supply
chain based on adopting a target market perspective and working
backward.

everyday low pricing (EDLP) in retailing, a constant low price with
few or no price promotions and special sales.
exchange the process of obtaining a desired product from someone
by offering something in return.
exclusive distribution severely limiting the number of intermediaries, in order to maintain control over the service level and outputs
offered by resellers.

demand-side method identifying the effect sponsorship has on
consumers’ brand knowledge.

expectancy-value model consumers evaluate products and
services by combining their brand beliefs—positive and negative—
according to their weighted importance.

design the totality of features that affect how a product looks, feels,
and functions to a consumer.

expected product a set of attributes and conditions buyers normally expect when they purchase this product.

direct (company) sales force full- or part-time paid employees
who work exclusively for the company.

experience curve (learning curve) a decline in the average cost
with accumulated production experience.

direct marketing the use of consumer-direct (CD) channels to
reach and deliver goods and services to customers without using
marketing middlemen.

experimental research the most scientifically valid research designed to capture cause-and-effect relationships by eliminating competing explanations of the observed findings.

Glossary

G3

F
fad a craze that is unpredictable, short-lived, and without social,
economic, and political significance.
family brand situation in which the parent brand is already associated with multiple products through brand extensions.
family of orientation parents and siblings.

holistic marketing concept a concept based on the development, design, and implementation of marketing programs,
processes, and activities that recognizes their breadth and interdependencies.
horizontal marketing system two or more unrelated companies
put together resources or programs to exploit an emerging market
opportunity.

features things that enhance the basic function of a product.

hub-and-spoke system product-management organization where
brand or product manager is figuratively at the center, with spokes
leading to various departments representing working relationships.

fixed costs (overhead) costs that do not vary with production or
sales revenue.

hybrid channels use of multiple channels of distribution to reach
customers in a defined market.

flexible market offering (1) a naked solution containing
the product and service elements that all segment members
value, and (2) discretionary options that some segment members
value.

I

family of procreation spouse and children.

focus group a gathering of six to ten people who are carefully selected based on certain demographic, psychographic, or other considerations and brought together to discuss various topics of
interest.
forecasting the art of anticipating what buyers are likely to do under
a given set of conditions.

image the set of beliefs, ideas, and impressions a person holds regarding an object.
industry a group of firms that offer a product or class of products
that are close substitutes for one another.
informational appeal elaborates on product or service attributes or
benefits.

form the size, shape, or physical structure of a product.

ingredient branding a special case of co-branding that involves
creating brand equity for materials, components, or parts that are
necessarily contained within other branded products.

forward invention creating a new product to meet a need in another country.

innovation any good, service, or idea that is perceived by someone
as new.

frequency programs (FPs) designed to provide rewards to customers who buy frequently and in substantial amounts.

innovation diffusion process the spread of a new idea from
its source of invention or creation to its ultimate users or
adopters.

full demand consumers are adequately buying all products put into
the marketplace.

G
generics unbranded, plainly packaged, less expensive versions of
common products such as spaghetti, paper towels, and canned
peaches.
global firm a firm that operates in more than one country and captures R&D, production, logistical, marketing, and financial advantages in its costs and reputation that are not available to purely
domestic competitors.

installation the work done to make a product operational in its
planned location.
institutional market schools, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons,
and other institutions that must provide goods and services to people in their care.
integrated logistics systems (ILS) materials management, material flow systems, and physical distribution, abetted by information
technology (IT).
integrated marketing mixing and matching marketing activities to
maximize their individual and collective efforts.

global industry an industry in which the strategic positions of competitors in major geographic or national markets are fundamentally
affected by their overall global positions.

integrated marketing channel system the strategies and tactics
of selling through one channel reflect the strategies and tactics of
selling through one or more other channels.

goal formulation the process of developing specific goals for the
planning period.

integrated marketing communications (IMC) a concept of marketing communications planning that recognizes the added value of
a comprehensive plan.

going-rate pricing price based largely on competitors’ prices.
gray market branded products diverted from normal or authorized
distribution channels in the country of product origin or across international borders.

H

intensive distribution the manufacturer placing the goods or
services in as many outlets as possible.
internal branding activities and processes that help to inform and
inspire employees.

hedonic bias when people have a general tendency to attribute
success to themselves and failure to external causes.

internal marketing an element of holistic marketing, is the task of
hiring, training, and motivating able employees who want to serve
customers well.

heuristics rules of thumb or mental shortcuts in the decision
process.

interstitials advertisements, often with video or animation, that pop
up between changes on a Web site.

high-low pricing charging higher prices on an everyday basis but
then running frequent promotions and special sales.

irregular demand consumer purchases vary on a seasonal,
monthly, weekly, daily, or even hourly basis.

G4

Glossary

J
jobbers small-scale wholesalers who sell to small retailers.

market opportunity analysis (MOA) system used to determine
the attractiveness and probability of success.

joint venture a company in which multiple investors share ownership and control.

market partitioning the process of investigating the hierarchy of
attributes consumers examine in choosing a brand if they use
phased decision strategies.

L

market penetration index a comparison of the current level of
market demand to the potential demand level.

latent demand consumers may share a strong need that cannot be
satisfied by an existing product.

market-penetration pricing pricing strategy where prices start low
to drive higher sales volume from price-sensitive customers and produce productivity gains.

lean manufacturing producing goods with minimal waste of time,
materials, and money.
learning changes in an individual’s behavior arising from experience.

market potential the limit approached by market demand as industry marketing expenditures approach infinity for a given marketing environment.

lexicographic heuristic a consumer choosing the best brand on
the basis of its perceived most important attribute.

market share a higher level of selective demand for a product.

licensed product one whose brand name has been licensed to
other manufacturers who actually make the product.

market-skimming pricing pricing strategy where prices start high
and are slowly lowered over time to maximize profits from less pricesensitive customers.

life-cycle cost the product’s purchase cost plus the discounted
cost of maintenance and repair less the discounted salvage value.

marketer someone who seeks a response (attention, a purchase, a
vote, a donation) from another party, called the prospect.

life stage a person’s major concern, such as going through a divorce, going into a second marriage, taking care of an older parent,
deciding to cohabit with another person, deciding to buy a new
home, and so on.

marketing the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have
value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large.

lifestyle a person’s pattern of living in the world as expressed in activities, interests, and opinions.

marketing audit a comprehensive, systematic, independent, and
periodic examination of a company’s or business unit’s marketing
environment, objectives, strategies, and activities.

line extension the parent brand is used to brand a new product
that targets a new market segment within a product category currently served by the parent brand.

marketing channel system the particular set of marketing channels employed by a firm.

line stretching a company lengthens its product line beyond its
current range.

marketing channels sets of interdependent organizations involved
in the process of making a product or service available for use or
consumption.

long-term memory (LTM) a permanent repository of information.
loyalty a commitment to rebuy or repatronize a preferred product or
service.

M
maintenance and repair the service program for helping customers keep purchased products in good working order.
market various groups of customers.
market-buildup method identifying all the potential buyers in each
market and estimating their potential purchases.
market-centered organizations companies that are organized
along market lines.
market demand the total volume of a product that would be bought
by a defined customer group in a defined geographical area in a defined time period in a defined marketing environment under a defined marketing program.
market forecast the market demand corresponding to the level of
industry marketing expenditure.
market logistics planning the infrastructure to meet demand, then
implementing and controlling the physical flows or materials and final
goods from points of origin to points of use, to meet customer requirements at a profit.
market-management organization a market manager supervising
several market-development managers, market specialists, or industry specialists and draw on functional services as needed.

marketing communications the means by which firms attempt to
inform, persuade, and remind consumers—directly or indirectly—
about products and brands that they sell.
marketing communications mix advertising, sales promotion,
events and experiences, public relations and publicity, direct marketing, and personal selling.
marketing concept is to find not the right customers for your products, but the right products for your customers
marketing decision support system (MDSS) a coordinated collection of data, systems, tools, and techniques with supporting software and hardware by which an organization gathers and interprets
relevant information from business and the environment and turns it
into a basis for marketing action.
marketing funnel identifies the percentage of the potential target
market at each stage in the decision process, from merely aware to
highly loyal.
marketing implementation the process that turns marketing
plans into action assignments and ensures that such assignments
are executed in a manner that accomplishes the plan’s stated
objectives.
marketing information system (MIS) people, equipment, and
procedures to gather, sort, analyze, evaluate, and distribute information to marketing decision makers.
marketing insights diagnostic information about how and why we
observe certain effects in the marketplace, and what that means to
marketers.
Glossary

G5

marketing intelligence system a set of procedures and sources
managers use to obtain everyday information about developments in
the marketing environment.
marketing management the art and science of choosing target
markets and getting, keeping, and growing customers through creating, delivering, and communicating superior customer value.
marketing metrics the set of measures that helps firms to quantify,
compare, and interpret their marketing performance.
marketing network the company and its supporting stakeholders,
with whom it has built mutually profitable business relationships.
marketing opportunity an area of buyer need and interest in
which there is a high probability that a company can profitably satisfy that need.

N
negative demand consumers who dislike the product and may
even pay to avoid it.
net price analysis analysis that encompasses company list price,
average discount, promotional spending, and co-op advertising to
arrive at net price.
noncompensatory models in consumer choice, when consumers
do not simultaneously consider all positive and negative attribute
considerations in making a decision.
nonexistent demand consumers who may be unaware of or uninterested in the product.

O

marketing plan written document that summarizes what the marketer has learned about the marketplace, indicates how the firm
plans to reach its marketing objectives, and helps direct and coordinate the marketing effort.

opinion leader the person in informal, product-related communications who offers advice or information about a specific product or
product category.

marketing public relations (MPR) publicity and other activities
that build corporate or product image to facilitate marketing goals.

ordering ease how easy it is for the customer to place an order with
the company.

marketing research the systematic design, collection, analysis,
and reporting of data and findings relevant to a specific marketing
situation facing the company.

organization a company’s structures, policies, and corporate
culture.

markup pricing an item by adding a standard increase to the product’s cost.

organizational buying the decision-making process by which formal organizations establish the need for purchased products and
services and identify, evaluate, and choose among alternative brands
and suppliers.

mass customization the ability of a company to meet each customer’s requirements
master brand situation in which the parent brand is already associated with multiple products through brand extensions.
materials and parts goods that enter the manufacturer’s product
completely.
media selection finding the most cost-effective media to deliver
the desired number and type of exposures to the target audience.
megatrends large social, economic, political, and technological
changes that are slow to form, and once in place, have an influence
for seven to ten years or longer.
membership groups groups having a direct influence on a person.
memory encoding how and where information gets into memory.
memory retrieval how and from where information gets out of
memory.

overall market share the company’s sales expressed as a percentage of total market sales.
overfull demand more consumers would like to buy the product
than can be satisfied.

P
packaging all the activities of designing and producing the container
for a product.
paid search marketers bid on search terms, when a consumer
searches for those words using Google, Yahoo!, or Bing, the marketer’s ad will appear on the results page, and advertisers pay only
if people click on links.
parent brand an existing brand that gives birth to a brand extension.

mental accounting the manner by which consumers code, categorize, and evaluate financial outcomes of choices.

partner relationship management (PRM) activities the firm undertakes to build mutually satisfying long-term relations with key
partners such as suppliers, distributors, ad agencies, and marketing
research suppliers.

microsales analysis examination of specific products and territories that fail to produce expected sales.

pay-per-click ads see paid search.

microsite a limited area on the Web managed and paid for by an external advertiser/company.

penetrated market the set of consumers who are buying a company’s product.

mission statements statements that organizations develop to
share with managers, employees, and (in many cases) customers.

perceived value the value promised by the company’s value proposition and perceived by the customer.

mixed bundling the seller offers goods both individually and in bundles.

perception the process by which an individual selects, organizes, and
interprets information inputs to create a meaningful picture of the world.

motive a need aroused to a sufficient level of intensity to drive us
to act.
multichannel marketing a single firm uses two or more marketing
channels to reach one or more customer segments.
multitasking doing two or more things at the same time.
G6

Glossary

performance marketing understanding the financial and nonfinancial returns to business and society from marketing activities and
programs.
performance quality the level at which the product’s primary characteristics operate.

personal communications channels two or more persons communicating directly face-to-face, person-to-audience, over the telephone, or through e-mail.
personal influence the effect one person has on another’s attitude
or purchase probability.
personality a set of distinguishing human psychological traits that
lead to relatively consistent responses to environmental stimuli.
place advertising (also out-of-home advertising) ads that appear
outside of home and where consumers work and play.

product system a group of diverse but related items that function
in a compatible manner.
production concept holds that consumers prefer products that are
widely available and inexpensive.
profitable customer a person, household, or company that over
time yields a revenue stream that exceeds by an acceptable amount
the company’s cost stream of attracting, selling, and servicing that
customer.
prospect a purchase, a vote, or a donation by a prospective client.

point-of-purchase (P-O-P) the location where a purchase is made,
typically thought of in terms of a retail setting.

prospect theory when consumers frame decision alternatives in
terms of gains and losses according to a value function.

points-of-difference (PODs) attributes or benefits that consumers
strongly associate with a brand, positively evaluate, and believe they
could not find to the same extent with a competitive brand.

psychographics the science of using psychology and demographics to better understand consumers.

points-of-parity (POPs) attribute or benefit associations that are
not necessarily unique to the brand but may in fact be shared with
other brands.
positioning the act of designing a company’s offering and image to
occupy a distinctive place in the minds of the target market.
potential market the set of consumers who profess a sufficient
level of interest in a market offer.
potential product all the possible augmentations and transformations the product or offering might undergo in the future.
price discrimination a company sells a product or service at two
or more prices that do not reflect a proportional difference in costs.

public any group that has an actual or potential interest in or impact
on a company’s ability to achieve its objectives.
public relations (PR) a variety of programs designed to promote or
protect a company’s image or its individual products.
publicity the task of securing editorial space—as opposed to paid
space—in print and broadcast media to promote something.
pull strategy when the manufacturer uses advertising and promotion to persuade consumers to ask intermediaries for the product,
thus inducing the intermediaries to order it.
purchase probability scale a scale to measure the probability of a
buyer making a particular purchase.
pure bundling a firm only offers its products as a bundle.

price escalation an increase in the price of a product due to added
costs of selling it in different countries.

pure-click companies that have launched a Web site without any
previous existence as a firm.

primary groups groups with which a person interacts continuously
and informally, such as family, friends, neighbors, and coworkers.

push strategy when the manufacturer uses its sales force and trade
promotion money to induce intermediaries to carry, promote, and
sell the product to end users.

principle of congruity psychological mechanism that states that
consumers like to see seemingly related objects as being as similar
as possible in their favorability.

Q

private label brand brands that retailers and wholesalers develop
and market.

quality the totality of features and characteristics of a product or
service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs.

product anything that can be offered to a market to satisfy a
want or need, including physical goods, services, experiences,
events, person, places, properties, organizations, information, and
ideas.

questionnaire a set of questions presented to respondents.

product adaptation altering the product to meet local conditions or
preferences.
product assortment the set of all products and items a particular
seller offers for sale.
product concept proposes that consumers favor products offering
the most quality, performance, or innovative features.
product invention creating something new via product development or other means.
product map competitors’ items that are competing against company X’s items.

R
reference groups all the groups that have a direct or indirect influence on a person’s attitudes or behavior.
reference prices pricing information a consumer retains in memory
that is used to interpret and evaluate a new price.
relationship marketing building mutually satisfying long-term relationships with key parties, in order to earn and retain their business.
relative market share market share in relation to a company’s
largest competitor.
reliability a measure of the probability that a product will not malfunction or fail within a specified time period.

product mix see product assortment.

repairability a measure of the ease of fixing a product when it malfunctions or fails.

product-mix pricing the firm searches for a set of prices that
maximizes profits on the total mix.

representativeness heuristic when consumers base their predictions on how representative or similar an outcome is to other examples.

product-penetration percentage the percentage of ownership or
use of a product or service in a population.

retailer (or retail store) any business enterprise whose sales volume comes primarily from retailing.
Glossary

G7

retailing all the activities in selling goods or services directly to final
consumers for personal, nonbusiness use.
risk analysis a method by which possible rates of returns and their
probabilities are calculated by obtaining estimates for uncertain variables affecting profitability.
role the activities a person is expected to perform.

S
sales analysis measuring and evaluating actual sales in relation to
goals.
sales budget a conservative estimate of the expected volume of
sales, used for making current purchasing, production, and cash flow
decisions.

social classes homogeneous and enduring divisions in a society,
which are hierarchically ordered and whose members share similar
values, interests, and behavior.
social marketing marketing done by a nonprofit or government
organization to further a cause, such as “say no to drugs.”
specialty goods goods with unique characteristics or brand identification for which enough buyers are willing to make a special purchasing effort.
sponsorship financial support of an event or activity in return for
recognition and acknowledgment as the sponsor.
stakeholder-performance scorecard a measure to track the satisfaction of various constituencies who have a critical interest in and
impact on the company’s performance.
status one’s position within his or her own hierarchy or culture.

sales promotion a collection of incentive tools, mostly short term,
designed to stimulate quicker or greater purchase of particular products or services by consumers or the trade.

straight extension introducing a product in a foreign market without any change in the product.

sales quota the sales goal set for a product line, company division,
or sales representative.

strategic brand management the design and implementation of
marketing activities and programs to build, measure, and manage
brands to maximize their value.

sales-variance analysis a measure of the relative contribution of
different factors to a gap in sales performance.
satisfaction a person’s feelings of pleasure or disappointment resulting from comparing a product’s perceived performance or outcome in relation to his or her expectations.
scenario analysis developing plausible representations of a firm’s
possible future that make different assumptions about forces driving the market and include different uncertainties.
secondary groups groups that tend to be more formal and require
less interaction than primary groups, such as religious, professional,
and trade-union groups.

strategic business units (SBUs) a single business or collection
of related businesses that can be planned separately from the rest of
the company, with its own set of competitors and a manager who is
responsible for strategic planning and profit performance.
strategic group firms pursuing the same strategy directed to the
same target market.
strategic marketing plan laying out the target markets and the
value proposition that will be offered, based on analysis of the best
market opportunities.
strategy a company’s game plan for achieving its goals.

selective attention the mental process of screening out certain
stimuli while noticing others.

style a product’s look and feel to the buyer.

selective distortion the tendency to interpret product information
in a way that fits consumer perceptions.

subculture subdivisions of a culture that provide more specific identification and socialization, such as nationalities, religions, racial
groups, and geographical regions.

selective distribution the use of more than a few but less than all
of the intermediaries who are willing to carry a particular product.
selective retention good points about a product that consumers
like are remembered and good points about competing products are
forgotten.
selling concept holds that consumers and businesses, if left alone,
won’t buy enough of the organization’s products.
served market all the buyers who are able and willing to buy a company’s product.
served market share a company’s sales expressed as a percentage of the total sales to its served market.

sub-brand a new brand combined with an existing brand.

subliminal perception receiving and processing subconscious
messages that affect behavior.
supersegment a set of segments sharing some exploitable similarity.
supplies and business services short-term goods and services
that facilitate developing or managing the finished product.
supply chain management (SCM) procuring the right inputs
(raw materials, components, and capital equipment), converting
them efficiently into finished products, and dispatching them to the
final destinations.

service any act or performance that one party can offer to another
that is essentially intangible and does not result in the ownership of
anything.

supply-side methods approximating the amount of time or space
devoted to media coverage of an event, for example, the number of
seconds the brand is clearly visible on a television screen or the column inches of press clippings that mention it.

share penetration index a comparison of a company’s current
market share to its potential market share.

T

shopping goods goods that the consumer, in the process of selection and purchase, characteristically compares on such bases as
suitability, quality, price, and style.
short-term memory (STM) a temporary repository of information.

G8

Glossary

tactical marketing plan marketing tactics, including product features, promotion, merchandising, pricing, sales channels, and service.
target costing deducting the desired profit margin from the price at
which a product will sell, given its appeal and competitors’ prices.

target market the part of the qualified available market the company decides to pursue.

unwholesome demand consumers may be attracted to products
that have undesirable social consequences.

target-return pricing determining the price that would yield the
firm’s target rate of return on investment (ROI).

V

telemarketing the use of telephone and call centers to attract
prospects, sell to existing customers, and provide service by taking
orders and answering questions.
total costs the sum of the fixed and variable costs for any given
level of production.
total customer benefit the perceived monetary value of the bundle of economic, functional, and psychological benefits customers
expect from a given market offering because of the product, service,
people, and image.
total customer cost the bundle of costs customers expect to incur
in evaluating, obtaining, using, and disposing of the given market offering, including monetary, time, energy, and psychic costs.

value chain a tool for identifying ways to create more customer
value.
value-delivery network (supply chain) a company’s supply chain
and how it partners with specific suppliers and distributors to make
products and bring them to markets.
value-delivery system all the expectancies the customer will have
on the way to obtaining and using the offering.
value network a system of partnerships and alliances that a firm
creates to source, augment, and deliver its offerings.
value pricing winning loyal customers by charging a fairly low price
for a high-quality offering.

total customer value the perceived monetary value of the bundle
of economic, functional, and psychological benefits customers expect from a given market offering.

value proposition the whole cluster of benefits the company promises to deliver.

total market potential the maximum sales available to all firms in
an industry during a given period, under a given level of industry marketing effort and environmental conditions.

venture team a cross-functional group charged with developing a
specific product or business.

total quality management an organization-wide approach to continuously improving the quality of all the organization’s processes,
products, and services.
tracking studies collecting information from consumers on a routine basis over time.
transaction a trade of values between two or more parties: A gives
X to B and receives Y in return.
transfer in the case of gifts, subsidies, and charitable contributions:
A gives X to B but does not receive anything tangible in return.
transfer price the price a company charges another unit in the
company for goods it ships to foreign subsidiaries.
transformational appeal elaborates on a nonproduct-related
benefit or image.
trend a direction or sequence of events that has some momentum
and durability.
two-part pricing a fixed fee plus a variable usage fee.
tying agreements agreement in which producers of strong brands
sell their products to dealers only if dealers purchase related products or services, such as other products in the brand line.

U

variable costs costs that vary directly with the level of production.

vertical integration situation in which manufacturers try to control
or own their suppliers, distributors, or other intermediaries.
vertical marketing system (VMS) producer, wholesaler(s), and retailer(s) acting as a unified system.
viral marketing using the Internet to create word-of-mouth effects
to support marketing efforts and goals.

W
warranties formal statements of expected product performance by
the manufacturer.
wholesaling all the activities in selling goods or services to those
who buy for resale or business use.

Y
yield pricing situation in which companies offer (1) discounted but
limited early purchases, (2) higher-priced late purchases, and (3) the
lowest rates on unsold inventory just before it expires.

Z
zero-level channel (direct-marketing channel) a manufacturer
selling directly to the final customer.

unsought goods those the consumer does not know about or does
not normally think of buying, like smoke detectors.

Glossary

G9

This page intentionally left blank

Image Credits
Chapter 1
page 2: Newscom; page 4:
Newscom; page 6: Getty
Images, Inc./Frank Micelotta;
page 7 (top): Alamy Images/
Walter Bibikow/Jon Arnold
Images Ltd.; page 7 (bottom):
Courtesy of U.S. Department of
Transportation, National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) and the
Ad Council; page 13: Jim
Schafer/Jim Schafer Location
Photography, Inc.; page 14:
AP Wide World Photos; page
15: Courtesy of H. J. Heinz
Company; page 21: Courtesy of
Snowshoe Mountain Resort;
page 24: Courtesy of Ben &
Jerry’s Homemade Inc.; page
29: Hugh Threlfall/Alamy Images
Royalty Free; page 30: Stanislaw
Tokarski/Shutterstock
Chapter 2
page 32: Reproduced with
permission of Yahoo! Inc. © 2010
Yahoo! Inc. Yahoo!, the Yahoo!
logo and IT’S Y!OU are
trademarks of Yahoo!; page 35:
Courtesy of Pratt & Whitney;
page 36: David Duprey/AP Wide
World Photos; page 40:
Courtesy of American Apparel,
Inc.; page 41: Courtesy of Liz
Claiborne Inc.; page 43:
Bloomberg/Getty Images, Inc.;
page 44 (top): Universal
Pictures/Album/Newscom;
page 44 (bottom): Humberto
Olarte Cupas/Alamy Images;
page 47: Justin Sullivan/Getty
Images, Inc.-Getty News;
page 50: Courtesy of
Loanbright.com; page 51: Dove
moisturizing cream, Dove is a
Unilever brand; page 53: David
Pearson/Alamy; page 57: MTP/
Alamy Images; page 58:
Imagebroker/Alamy Images
Royalty Free
Chapter 3
page 66: Andy Kropa/Redux
Pictures; page 69: Courtesy of
The Michigan Economic
Development Corporation; page
70: Bloomberg/Getty Images,
Inc.; page 71: Bloomberg/Getty
Images, Inc.; page 73: Getty
Images, Inc.; page 76:
Photographer: Morad
Bouchakour. Courtesy of
General Electric Company; page
78: Starwood Hotels & Resorts;
page 80 (left): Ben Baker/Redux
Pictures; page 80 (right): Peter

DaSilva/The New York Times/
Redux Pictures; page 81: Reed
Saxon/AP Wide World Photos;
page 83: Michelle Pemberton/
Indianapolis Star/Rapport
Press/Newscom; page 84:
Blend Images/Alamy Images;
page 93: James M. Phelps,
Jr./Shutterstock; page 94: Chris
Howes/Wild Places
Photography/Alamy Images
Chapter 4
Page 96: Courtesy of KimberlyClark. Svan Scooter used
courtesy of Svan of Sweden AB;
page 98: Christopher Schall/
Impact Photo; page 100:
EyesWideOpen/Contributor/
Getty Images, Inc.-Liaison;
page 101: Photographer Paul
Elledge. Courtesy of Bank of
America Corporation; page 103:
Courtesy of Nottingham-Spirk;
page 107: Erich Schlegel/The
New York Times/Redux
Pictures; page 109: Charles
Sturge/Alamy Images; page 113:
Courtesy of Frito-Lay, Inc.; page
114: Charles Sturge/Alamy
Images; page 116: Courtesy of
Servus Credit Union, Ltd.; page
119: Michael Halberstadt/Alamy
Images; page 120: UpperCut
Images/Alamy Images Royalty
Free
Chapter 5
page 122: Jae C. Hong/AP Wide
World Photos; page 124:
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty
Images, Inc.-Bloomberg News;
page 126: Seth Perlman/AP
Wide World Photos; page 128:
Courtesy of Volvo Car
Corporation; page 132:
Associated Press/Rick Feld/AP;
page 138: The BURGER KING®
trademarks and advertisements
are used with permission from
Burger King Corporation; page
139: Courtesy of Amy’s Kitchen,
Inc.; page 142: Courtesy of
Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC; page
148: PSL Images/Alamy Images;
page 149: ICP/Alamy Images
Chapter 6
page 150: AP Wide World
Photos; page 154: Courtesy of
Hot Topic, Inc.; page 156 (top):
Adrian Buck/Alamy Images;
page 156 (bottom): Courtesy of
Snap Fitness; page 158:
Courtesy of Joie de Vivre
Hospitality, Inc.; page 164 (top):
Woolite® is a registered
trademark of Reckitt Benckiser

Inc.; page 164 (bottom):
Courtesy of State Farm Mutual
Automobile Insurance Co.;
page 169: AP Photo/Douglas C.
Pizac; page 171: Paramount
Pictures/Photoshot Archive
Creative; page 173: Courtesy of
Savers, Inc.; page 177: John
Eder/Image Bank/Getty Images;
page 178: D. Hurst/Alamy
Images; page 180: Archimage/
Alamy Images
Chapter 7
page 182: Bloomberg/Getty
Images, Inc.; page 184:
Courtesy of Navistar, Inc.; page
187: Courtesy of NetApp, Inc.;
page 190: Courtesy of SAS
Institute, Inc. Copyright © 2010
SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC,
USA; page 191: Newscom; page
193: SuperStock, Inc.; page
195: age fotostock/SuperStock;
page 197: Courtesy of Ritchie
Bros. Auctioneers; page 202:
Courtesy of Tellabs; page 205:
Courtesy of Chapman Kelly;
page 208: digitallife/Alamy
Images; page 210: Clynt
Garnham/Alamy Images
Chapter 8
page 212: Ramona Settle/Alamy
Images; page 217 (top):
Courtesy of Avon Products, Inc.;
page 217 (bottom): David L.
Moore-California/Alamy Images;
page 219: Courtesy of Procter &
Gamble; page 220: Getty
Images, Inc./Jeff Gross-Staff/
Getty Images Sports; page 221
(top): © Joe Giron/Corbis All
Rights Reserved; page 221
(bottom): Getty Images, Inc.;
page 222: Alamy/Juhn Lund/
Drew Kelly/Blend Images;
page 223: UPI; page 225: Naum
Kazhdan/The New York Times/
Redux Pictures; page 227: Mike
Groll/AP Wide World Photos;
page 231: Ross D.
Franklin/Associated Press/AP;
page 234 (top): © The Procter &
Gamble Company. Used by
permission; page 234 (bottom):
Courtesy of Toms of Maine;
page 237: ICP/Alamy Images;
page 238: Max Earey/
Shutterstock
Chapter 9
page 240: © Smith/Retna Ltd./
Corbis All Rights Reserved;
page 242: Kristoffer Tripplaar/
Alamy Images; page 243:
Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty
Images, Inc.-Bloomberg News;

page 244: Cameron Spencer/
Staff/Getty Images, Inc.; page
245: H. Lorren Au Jr./Orange
County Register/MCT/
Newscom; page 249: Courtesy
of MasterCard Worldwide.
Photograph © Julian
Wolkenstein/Bransch; page 250:
Courtesy of 42Below; page 251
(top): John Kuntz/The Plain
Dealer/AP Associated Press;
page 251 (bottom): Courtesy
of Darden Restaurants, Inc.;
page 253: AP Photo/Keystone,
Arno Balzarinl; page 259 (top):
Courtesy of Discovery
Communications, Inc.; page 259
(bottom): Jeremy Noble/Flickr;
page 262: Courtesy of United
Technologies Corporation;
page 264: © 2010 Crayola. Oval
Logo®, Chevron® design,
Serpentine® design, Color
Wonder®, Twistables® and
Color Explosion® are registered
trademarks; Smile design™,
Pip-Squeaks™, Color
Switchers™ and Glow
Explosion™ are trademarks of
Crayola. © Disney. © Disney/
Pixar; page 269: PSL Images/
Alamy Images; page 271:
Paul Prescott/Shutterstock
Chapter 10
page 274: Amanda Kamen;
page 276: Newscom; page 277:
Imagebrokers/Photoshot; page
281: © 2010 Visa Corporation.
Courtesy of Visa International,
Lew’lara/TBWA, and Timothy
Hogan. Photographer:
Alexandre Catan; page 282: Jeff
Greenberg/Alamy Images; page
285 (top): Newscom; page 285
(bottom): Matt Stroshane/
Bloomberg/Getty Images, Inc.Getty News; page 288: James F.
Quinn/Chicago Tribune/
Newscom; page 289: Courtesy
of Progressive Casualty
Insurance Company; page 293
(top): AP Photo/Mark Lennihan;
page 293 (bottom): Alex Polvi;
page 295: Alex Segre/Alamy
Images; page 296: Richard
Levine/Alamy Images
Chapter 11
page 298: Newscom; page 301:
Hannah Morse; page 302:
Amanda Kamen; page 304: Kim
Karpeles/Alamy Images; page
306: Courtesy of Ariat
International, Inc.; page 307:
Pepsi-Cola Company; page 308:
Bloomberg/Getty Images, Inc.;
Credits

C1

page 309: Courtesy of Zippo
Manufacturing Company;
page 310: Courtesy of Digicel
Group; page 312: ICP/Alamy
Images; page 314: Courtesy of
AB Electrolux; page 318:
Reproduced by kind permission
of Sainsbury’s Supermarkets
Ltd.; page 319: Courtesy of
General Electric Company.
Photograph by Benedict
Redgrove; page 321: Adriano
Castelli/Shutterstock; page 322:
Scott Prokop/Shutterstock
Chapter 12
page 324: Feng Li/Getty Images,
Inc.-Getty News; page 327:
Courtesy of Jamestown
Container Companies;
page 329: Sean Gallup/Getty
Images, Inc.-Getty News; page
330: Monica Rueda/AP Wide
World Photos; page 332:
UpperCut Images/Superstock
Royalty Free; page 333: Courtesy
of Bang and Olufsen; page 335:
Courtesy of Sub-Zero, Inc.; page
336: Courtesy of Michelin North
America, Inc.; page 342: Michael
Perez/Philadelphia Inquirer/
MCT/Newscom; page 343: Matt
Cardy/Getty Images, Inc.-Getty
News; page 345: Courtesy
Mohawk Industries. Carpet made
with DuPont™ Sorona®; page
347: Courtesy of Sara Lee
Corporation; page 348: Mary
Altaffer/AP Wide World Photos;
page 350: Woodsy/
Shutterstock; page 352: Jose
Gil/Shutterstock
Chapter 13
page 354: Holandaluz Vincent
de Vries/Alamy Images;
page 356: Courtesy of Zipcar;
page 359 (left): Michael
Caulfield/Getty ImagesWireImage.com; page 359
(right): Kevin Mazur/Getty
Images/Time Life Pictures; page
361: John Raoux/AP Wide World
Photos; page 362 (top): Eric
Piermont/Getty Images, Inc.
AFP; page 362 (bottom):
MajaPhoto/Dreamstime LLCRoyalty Free; page 363:
Courtesy of JetBlue Airways
Corporation; page 369: Courtesy
of Schneider National, Inc.; page
370: Karen Ballard/Redux for
Fast Company; page 371:
Courtesy of USAA; page 379:
Kristoffer Tripplaar/Alamy
Images; page 380: Kristoffer
Tripplaar/Alamy Images

C2

Credits

Chapter 14
page 382: Dorothea Schmid/
laif/Redux; page 385: Sandra
Hoyn/laif/Redux; page 388:
© Corbis All Rights Reserved;
page 389 (top, left): Andre
Jenny/Alamy Images; page 389
(top, right): Kristoffer
Tripplaar/Alamy Images; page
389 (bottom, left): Stu/Alamy
Images; page 389 (bottom,
right): Chuck Franklin/Alamy
Images; page 390: Alex
Segre/Alamy Images; page 394:
Hiroko Masuike/The New York
Times; page 397: Courtesy of
Parker Hannifin Corporation;
page 399: Courtesy of Kenworth
Truck Company; page 401:
Gordon M. Grant/The New York
Times; page 407: Chris WardeJones/Bloomberg via Getty
Images; page 411:
goldenangel/Shutterstock;
page 412: Carlos E. Santa
Maria/Shutterstock
Chapter 15
page 414: Justin Sullivan/Getty
Images, Inc.-Getty News; page
417: Courtesy REI; page 418:
Courtesy of Nautilus, Inc.;
page 421 (top): Courtesy of
RedEnvelope®; page 421
(bottom): Courtesy of WM
GreenOps LLC.; page 422:
Philip Scalia/Alamy Images;
page 424: Jackson Lowen/The
New York Times; page 425:
Courtesy of STIHL Incorporated;
page 430: Hemis/Alamy Images;
page 431: Graham Jepson/
Alamy Images; page 434:
Richard Levine/Alamy Images;
page 436: Paul Sakuma/AP
Wide World Photos; page 440:
Tomohiro Ohsumi/Getty Images,
Inc-Bloomberg News; page 443:
NetPics/Alamy Images; page
444: Mark Mercer/Alamy Images
Chapter 16
page 446: Brad Swonetz/Redux
Pictures; page 448: Charles
Krupa/AP Wide World Photos;
page 451: Tannen Maury/Getty
Images, Inc.-Bloomberg News;
page 453: Steven Senne/AP
Wide World Photos; page 455:
Courtesy of Aéropostale, Inc.;
page 456: Richard Levine/Alamy
Images; page 457: Courtesy
of Bass Pro, Inc.; page 460:
JB Reed/Getty Images,
Inc.-Bloomberg News; page
465: Courtesy of ConMed, Inc.;
page 468: Courtesy of Cameron

Hughes Wine; page 470:
CuboImages srl/Alamy Images;
page 471: Kristoffer
Tripplaar/Alamy Images
Chapter 17
page 474: Courtesy of Ocean
Spray Cranberries, Inc.; page
477 (top): © Corbis All Rights
Reserved; page 477 (bottom):
Courtesy of Motorola, Inc.; page
480: Courtesy of Philips
Consumer Lifestyle; page 483:
Courtesy of General Electric
Company. Photographer: Kai
Uwe Gundlach; page 484: Jin
Lee/Getty Images, Inc.-Getty
News; page 487: Courtesy of
Priceline.com Incorporated;
page 488: Courtesy of Deere &
Company; page 489: Getty
Images, Inc.; page 493: Reprint
Courtesy of International
Business Machines Corporation,
© 2010 International Business
Machines Corporation;
page 498: Copyright
DeepGreen/Shutterstock;
page 499: Kristoffer
Tripplaar/Alamy Images
Chapter 18
page 502: © The Procter
Gamble Company. Used by
permission; page 506:
PRNewsFoto/Body by Milk;
page 507: Courtesy of T-Mobile
Limited; page 508: Courtesy of
Aflac Incorporated; page 512:
© 2010 Geico. All rights
reserved. Used with permission;
page 514: Snickers is a
registered trademark of Mars,
Incorporated and its affiliates.
This trademark is used with
permission. Mars, Incorporated
is not associated with Pearson.
Advertisement printed with
permission of Mars,
Incorporated; page 522:
Courtesy of Coupons.com
Incorporated; page 524: Michael
Schmelling; page 527: “The
Crayola FACTORY® Tour”
Photo provided courtesy of
Crayola LLC and used with
permission. © 2010 Crayola.
The Crayola FACTORY, “TIP”
character and Serpentine
Design are trademarks of
Crayola LLC; page 528:
Mike Derer/AP Wide World
Photos; page 529: Dreyer’s
Grand Ice Cream; page 531:
Richard Levine/Alamy Images;
page 532: mediablitzimages (uk)
Limited/Alamy Images

Chapter 19
page 534: Pepsi-Cola Company.
Photographer: Martin
Wonnacott; page 537: Courtesy
of L.L.Bean Inc.; page 538: Lucy
Gauntlett; page 541: The
BURGER KING® trademarks
and advertisements are used
with permission from Burger
King Corporation; page 544:
Trademarks are use with
permission of Volkswagen
Group of America, Inc.; page
547: © Intuit Inc. All rights
reserved; page 548: Courtesy of
Treehugger; page 549: Courtesy
of Pistachio Consulting; page
550: Courtesy of Blendtec; page
552: Courtesy of Ford Motor
Company; page 553: Jin Lee/
Getty Images, Inc.-Getty News;
page 563: 1000 Words/
Shutterstock; page 564:
PSL Images/Alamy Images
Chapter 20
page 566: Ryan Collerd/The
New York Times/Redux
Pictures; page 569: Courtesy of
W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc.;
page 572: Maurizio Gambarini/
Newscom; page 575: Jessica
Rinaldi/Reuters Limited;
page 576: Buzz Pictures/
Alamy Images; page 578: Martin
Oeser/Getty Images, Inc. AFP;
page 581: PRNewsFoto/Marriott
International, Inc.; page 586:
Jose M. Osorio/Chicago
Tribune/Newscom; page 587:
© Corbis All Rights Reserved;
page 589: Jim Wilson/The New
York Times/Redux Pictures;
page 591: John Baran/Alamy
Images Royalty Free; page 593:
PSL Images/Alamy Images
Chapter 21
page 594: Joerg Boethling/Alamy
Images; page 596: Ron Heflin/AP
Wide World Photos; page 598:
Used with permission from
Microsoft; page 599: Ícaro
Messias/Wikimedia Commons;
page 603: Anita Back/laif/Redux
Pictures; page 605: Matthew
Ashton/Alamy Images; page 606:
Miquel Gonzalez/laif/Redux
Pictures; page 607: Indiapix/
Alamy Images; page 609: Getty
Images, Inc.; page 612:
Getty Images, Inc.; page 614:
Gold/Miller Productions/
Album/Newscom; page 615:
Imaginechina/AP Wide World
Photos; page 618: Sandy
Young/Alamy Images Royalty

Free; page 619: Lou
Linwei/Alamy Images
Chapter 22
page 620: Courtesy of The
Timberland Company;
page 622: Journal Times, Scott
Anderson/AP Wide World

Photos; page 625: © Corbis All
Rights Reserved; page 627:
Adam Rountree/Bloomberg/
Getty Images-Bloomberg; page
630: Courtesy of Procter &
Gamble; page 632: Irwin
Fedriansyah/AP Wide World

Photos; page 635: Courtesy of
British Airways Plc; page 636:
Allsport Concepts/Getty Images;
page 638: Ali Burafi/AP Wide
World Photos; page 639:
Courtesy of the World Wildlife
Fund; page 643: Matt

Rourke/AP Wide World Photos;
page 649: Alistair Ruff/Alamy
Images Royalty
Free; page 650: Leabrooks
Photography/Alamy Images
Royalty Free.

Credits

C3

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Name
Aaker, David A., 203
Aaker, Jennifer, 157
Aaron, Hank, 533
Abate, Tom, 108
Abelson, Jenn, 533
Adamy, Janet, 272
Adler, Jerry, 83
Aguilera, Christina, 402
Aksoy, Lerzan, 129
Aldrin, Buzz, 295
Allen, James, 30
Allen, Paul, 93
Allison, Melissa, 148
Ambler, Tim, 115
Anderson, Chris, 235, 385
Anderson, Diane, 649
Anderson, James C., 199, 231,
400, 461
Andreassen, Tor Wallin, 129
Aniston, Jennifer, 293
Ansari, Kimia M., 238
Ante, Spencer E., 369
Aquilla, Frank, 602
Ariely, Dan, 176
Armstrong, Lance, 29
Armstrong, Shelagh, 75
Arndt, Michael, 403
Arnould, Eric J., 254
Aronson, Arnold, 387
Arroniz, Inigo, 46, 47
Auguste, Byron G., 377
Austen, Ian, 593
Bailey, Jeff, 413
Bajarin, Tim, 59
Baker, David R., 58
Balachnadar, Subramanian, 344
Baldwin, Alec, 486
Bamford, Joanna, 149
Bannan, Karen J., 552
Barbaro, Michael, 95
Barrett, Colleen, 413
Bartz, Carol, 33
Basu, Amiya, 344
Batelle, John, 552
Bauer, Margie, 602
Baumgartner, Hans, 104
Beckham, David, 6, 477
Bedbury, Scott, 267
Beene, Geoffrey, 288
Begley, Ed, Jr., 81
Belch, George, 166
Belch, Michael, 166
Bello, John, 305, 553
Bemner, Brian, 353
Bendapudi, Neeli, 381
Berfield, Susan, 458
Berger, Jonah, 339
Berner, Robert, 270, 565, 575
Berry, Leonard L., 372, 374, 381
Berry, Tim, 55
Bertinelli, Valerie, 485
Best, Roger J., 231

Beucke, Dan, 533
Beyoncé, 282, 359
Bezos, Jeff, 443
Bickoff, J. Darius, 293
Binkley, Christina, 334
Birkett, Laurie, 146
Birtwell, Celia, 431
Bitner, Mary Jo, 360
Bjork, Christopher, 471
Blacker, Stanley, 288
Blakely, David, 119
Bloom, Paul N., 83
Bodett, Tom, 509
Boies, David, 359
Bolt, Usain, 310
Bond, John, 237, 238
Boniface, Russell, 458
Bono, 636
Bonoma, Thomas V., 230
Boudette, Neil, 239
Bowen, David, 364
Boykin-Towns, Karen, 194
Boyle, Matthew, 445
Brady, Michael K., 316
Brady, Tom, 293
Brakus, Joško, 358
Branson, Richard, 650–51
Brasel, S. Adam, 476
Breen, Bill, 76
Briesch, Richard A., 339
Brin, Sergey, 30
Britton, Tracy, 238
Brodie, John, 448
Broniarczyk, Susan M., 339
Brosnan, Tim, 533
Brown, Heidi, 322
Brown, Stuart F., 353
Brown, Tim, 120, 569
Bryant, Kobe, 29
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 235
Buffet, Warren, 512
Bulik, Beth Snyder, 334, 592
Burnsed, Brian, 403
Burrows, Peter, 592
Burton, Philip Ward, 509
Bush, Jason, 601
Bush, Michael, 121
Buss, Dale, 112, 351
Butler, David, 333
Byrne, John A., 211
Cacioppo, John, 173
Cadwallader, Susan, 372
Callahan, Sean, 209
Callebaut, Jan, 160
Campanelli, Melissa, 601
Capell, Kerry, 180, 385, 471, 651
Capon, Noel, 555
Carbone, Lewis P., 372
Carroll, Dave, 362
Carvajal, Doreen, 619
Casey, Paul, 486
Caslione, John A., 16
Cassidy, Hilary, 297
Cassidy, John, 235, 564

Cendrowski, Scott, 297
Chamberlain, Lisa, 120
Chang, Rita, 31
Charan, Ram, 575
Chattopadhyay, Amitava, 552
Cheetah, Chester (mascot), 113
Chen, Pei-yu, 344
Chernev, Alexander, 339
Cheverton, Peter, 555
Child, Peter N., 423
Chintagunta, Pradeep K., 339
Chizauskas, Cathy, 636
Chou, Jay, 477
Chouinard, Yvon, 629
Christensen, Glenn L., 106
Chu, Kathy, 403
Chung, Mong-Koo, 596
Cink, Stewart, 486
Cioletti, Jeff, 219
Clancy, Heather, 59
Clark, Don, 59
Clarkson, Kelly, 293
Clifford, Stephanie, 59, 146
Clifton, Rita, 257
Cobain, Kurt, 221
Cohen, Arianne, 633
Cohen, Ben, 24
Cohen, Sacha Baron, 614
Cohn, Laura, 149
Colgate, Mark, 364
Collins, Jim, 46
Colvin, Geoffrey, 211, 575
Comarow, Avery, 381
Comeau, Michael, 593
Comstock, Beth, 210, 211
Cone, Carol L., 637
Conlin, Michelle, 500
Cooil, Bruce, 129
Cook, Brad, 532
Cook, Scott, 120
Cooper, Robert G., 574
Cooper, Simon, 379
Corbett, Peter, 564
Coster, Helen, 448, 602
Coupland, Douglas, 221
Cox, Courtney, 578
Creamer, Matthew, 412
Cutler, Alex, 319
Daly, John, 305
DaSilva, Alison T., 637
David, George, 262
Dawson, Chester, 353
Day, George, 35
De Avila, Joseph, 592
DeGeneres, Ellen, 282, 297
DeJoria, John Paul, 334
Dekimpe, Marnik G., 316
Dell, Michael, 70, 124
De Lollis, Barbara, 120
Dempsey, Patrick, 486
De Niro, Robert, 282, 297, 486
Depp, Johnny, 486
Deshpande, Rohit, 203
Deutschman, Alan, 651

Dey, Romit, 432
Diamond, Seth, 110
Dichter, Ernest, 160
Dickson, Tom, 550
Diehl, Kristin, 339
Dillon, Mary, 272
Dion, Celine, 485
Disney, Roy, 178
Disney, Walt, 178
Doeble, Justin, 322
Dolan, Matthew, 552
Dolliver, Mark, 83
Donahue, John, 412
Donaton, Scott, 276
Donnelly, James H., 357
Dotzel, Thomas, 372
Doyle, Patrick, 169
Doyle, Peter, 317
Drucker, Peter, 5, 38, 53
Drumwright, Minette, 634
Du Plesis, Erik, 476
Dyson, James, 571, 572
Eakin, Emily, 106
Ebenkamp, Becky, 146
Edison, Thomas, 210
Edmondson, Gail, 239
Edwards, Cliff, 59
Einhorn, Bruce, 602
Elkind, Peter, 651
Elliott, Stuart, 94, 516
Ellis, Perry, 288
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 646
Engardio, Pete, 76
English, Todd, 524
Epstein, Marc J., 256
Ewers, Justin, 30, 165
Ewing, Jack, 618
Fackler, Martin, 322
Fader, Peter, 134
Fahey, Liam, 256
Farris, Paul, 114, 402
Favre, Brett, 485
Feder, Barnaby J., 192
Federer, Roger, 29, 243, 532
Feinberg, Fred, 108
Feldman, Mark A., 637
Fey, Tina, 282
50 Cent, 293
Fisher, Daniel, 211
Fishman, Charles, 353
Fiske, Neil, 218, 219
FitzGerald, Niall, 342
Flannery, Russell, 602
Fletcher, Richard, 149
Ford, Henry, 233, 314, 576
Foreman, George, 485
Fornell, Claes, 130
Fournier, Susan, 255
Fox, Edward J., 339
Frank, Robert J., 301
Frazier, Mya, 500
Freud, Sigmund, 160
Friedman, Milton, 629
Index

I1

Frommer, Dan, 31
Furguson, John, 94
Gale, Porter, 114, 245
Gallo, Carmine, 380
Galvin, John, 270
Gamble, James, 269
Gates, Bill, 93
Gaultier, Jean Paul, 499
Geiling, Peter, 602
George, Jeffrey P., 301
George, Kevin, 565
George, William R., 357
Gerstner, Lou, 628
Gerstner, Louis V., Jr., 323
Gerzema, John, 248
Ghosh, Bikram, 344
Ghosn, Carlos, 617
Giannulli, Mossimo, 456, 499
Gilbert, Jennifer, 192
Gillette, King C., 532
Gilly, Mary C., 376
Gimbel, Barney, 413
Ginsberg, Jill Meredith, 83
Gips, James, 476
Giscard d’Estaing, Henri, 213
Gladwell, Malcolm, 165, 551
Gobé, Marc, 291
Godin, Seth, 136–37, 543, 570
Goizueta, Roberto, 532
Goldberg, Whoopi, 487
Goldenberg, Jacob, 552
Golder, Peter, 312–13
Goldiner, Dave, 95
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 195
Gorog, Danny, 31
Gourville, John, 339
Govindarajan, Vijay, 76
Graf, Steffi, 295
Graham, Jefferson, 31
Graham, Lauren, 486
Graves, Michael, 456, 499
Green, Richard, 431
Green, Stephen, 238
Greene, Jay, 192
Greenfield, Jerry, 24
Greenhouse, Steven, 445
Greenwald, John, 532
Gregory, Sean, 95
Gremler, Dwayne D., 360
Grewal, Dhruv, 372
Greyser, Stephen A., 316
Griffith, Scott, 356
Gronbach, Kenneth, 220
Grove, Andy, 576
Gupta, Anil K., 601
Gupta, Rajat, 575
Gupta, Sunil, 134
Gutchess, Angela H., 108
Guth, Robert A., 94
Ha, Peter, 499
Haeckel, Stephan H., 372
Hague, Paul, 104
Hall, Malcolm Macalister, 552
I2

Index

Hamilton, Laird, 297
Hamilton, Ryan, 339
Hamm, Steve, 46, 575
Hanks, Tom, 486
Hanlon, Patrick, 292
Hanna, Jim, 649
Hansell, Saul, 593
Hardie, Bruce, 134
Harmon, Eric P., 377
Harrington, Anna, 322
Harris, Rebecca, 102
Hartman, Cathy L., 83
Hastings, Reed, 415
Haugtvedt, Curt P., 339
Hawk, Tony, 221
Hayashi, Alden M., 146
Hayes, John, 296
Haysbert, Dennis, 485
Heath, Chip, 165, 334
Heath, Dan, 165, 334
Hein, Kenneth, 59, 238, 458,
633
Heinz, Henry John, 632
Heires, Katherine, 385
Helm, Burt, 30, 58, 94, 476
Helsen, Kristiaan, 316
Hempel, Jessi, 593
Henderson, Naomi R., 102
Henley, Jon, 180
Henry, Thierry, 532
Hepburn, Audrey, 295
Herr, Paul M., 339
Herzberg, Frederick, 160, 161
Heywood, Suzanne, 423
Hilfiger, Tommy, 288
Hill, Sam, 651
Hilton, Paris, 486
Hindmarch, Anya, 499
Hirshberg, Gary, 630
Hitt, Loren M., 344
Hoch, Stephen J., 339
Hof, Robert D., 444
Hofman, Mike, 165
Hogan, John E., 391
Holahan, Cattherine, 412, 565
Holt, Benjamin, 350
Holt, Douglas, 292
Honigman, Daniel B., 112, 413
Horovitz, Bruce, 649
Horyn, Cathy, 334
Hosaka, Tomoko A., 353
Hovland, Carl, 484
Howard, Theresa, 565, 649
Howe, Peter J., 385
Hsieh, Tony, 447
Hu, Judy, 210
Hu, Yu “Jeffrey,” 235
Hughes, Cameron, 468
Hunt, Shelby D., 203
Hurd, Mark, 45
Huston, Larry, 575
Huver, Scott, 486
Iezzi, Teressa, 120
Iger, Bob, 179

Ihlwan, Moon, 46, 322
Immelt, Jeffrey R., 76, 210
Isidore, Chris, 353
Iwata, Edward, 649
Iwata, Satoru, 567
Iyengar, Sheena S., 339
Jackson, Peter, 104
James, LeBron, 29, 79, 80, 484
Jana, Reena, 30, 76, 83, 295
Jaworski, Bernard J., 278, 375,
541, 542
Jennings, Brandon, 299
Jeter, Derek, 532
Joachimsthaler, Erich, 573, 574
Jobs, Steve, 528, 589, 592
Johnson, Mark, 121
Johnson, William R., 632
Johnston, Megan, 633
Jolie, Angelina, 243
Jones, Reginald, 210
Jones, Terril Yue, 592
Jordan, Michael, 29
Juskalian, Russ, 176
Kalasvuo, Oli Pekka, 618
Kamprad, Ingvar, 179–80
Kang, Stephanie, 476
Kaplan, Allison, 30
Kapner, Suzanne, 95
Kardes, Frank R., 339
Karlgard, Rich, 46
Karpinski, Richard, 31
Kasner, Sarah Jeffrey, 102
Kawasaki, Guy, 38
Keaveney, Susan M., 371
Keegan, Warren, 608
Keiningham, Timothy L., 129
Keller, Kevin Lane, 203, 256,
267, 335, 496, 499, 608
Kessler, Michelle, 58
Kim, Ju-Young, 385
Kim, W. Chan, 278–79
King, Regina, 486
Kirkpatrick, David, 59
Kiviat, Barbara, 165
Klein, Calvin, 288
Klein, Karen E., 121
Klein, Norman, 316
Klein, Russ, 541
Kliger, Michael, 423
Knight, Philip, 29
Knutson, Brian, 108
Kolbert, Elizabeth, 176
Komen, Susan G., 635
Kotler, Philip, 16, 19, 23, 486,
576, 647
Kranhold, Kathryn, 129, 211
Kroc, Ray, 271, 366
Kroeber, Arthur, 601
Kudrow, Lisa, 578
Kuksov, Dimitri, 339
Kumar, Nirmalya, 199, 301, 461
Kumar, V., 134
Kurahashi, Nobuo, 35

Lafley, A. G., 137, 292, 574, 575
La Forgia, John, 381
Lange, Liz, 95, 456, 499
LaPointe, Pat, 117–18
Lashinsky, Adam, 412
Lavabre, Louise, 602
Lavidge, Robert J., 481
Layne, Rachel, 211
Lazaridis, Mike, 45, 593
Lebar, Ed, 248
Lee, Ka, 134
Lee, Lara, 255
Leggio, Jennifer, 58
Lehmann, Donald R., 134, 256
Lenhart, Amanda, 516
Leonard, Devin, 94, 448
Leondis, Alexis, 403
Leonwood, Leon, 536
Lepper, Mark R., 339
Letz, Jim, 352
Levitt, Theodore, 18, 307
Levy, Piet, 102, 486, 491
Levy, Steven, 592
Lewis, David, 333
Light, Larry, 292
Lincoln, Abraham, 383
Lindstrom, Martin, 108
Lippert, Barbara, 30
Liptrot, Hannah, 149
Little, John, 112
Liu, Wendy, 339
Loeb, Lisa, 528
Lohr, Steve, 323
Lopez, Jennifer, 295
Lowry, Adam, 275
Lyman, Jay, 592
Ma, Jack, 440
MacDonald, Kelsey, 115–16
MacKinnon, Mark, 602
MacMillan, Douglas, 412
Madden, Normandy, 238
Madonna, 295, 402
Mahoney, Sarah, 83, 219
Maier, Matthew, 385
Malhotra, Arvind, 376
Malkoff, Mark, 528
Malone, Chris, 17
Malone, Matthew, 413
Maloney, John C., 484
Manning, Eli, 522, 523
Manning, Jeff, 224
Manning, Peyton, 522, 523
Mantle, Mickey, 533
Martin, Andrew, 272
Martinez, Amy, 148
Maslow, Abraham, 160–61
Massarella, Linda, 486
Mateschitz, Dietrich, 498
Matzer, Marla, 58
Mauborgne, Renée, 278–79
Mayer, John, 591
Maynard, Michelle, 413
Mayo, Charles, 380
Mayo, William, 380

McCausland, Tom, 7
McDonald, Bob, 629
McDonald, Malcolm, 555
McGonigal, Jane, 515
McGovern, Gail, 17
McGregor, Jena, 46, 129, 369
McKeough, Tim, 351
McLean, Bethany, 334
Mehegan, David, 176
Meredith, Geoffrey E., 220
Mersereau, Marilyn, 57
Meyer, Ann, 552
Miller, Bode, 305
Mintz, Jessica, 146
Miyamoto, Shigeru, 567
Mizrahi, Isaac, 95, 456
Mogilner, Cassie, 339
Moldovan, Sarit, 552
Mollenkamp, Carrick, 238
Moorman, Christine, 203
Morais, Richard C., 619
Moran, Ursula, 435
Morgan, Neil A., 129
Morgan, Robert M., 203
Moriarty, Rowland T., 426, 435
Morita, Akio, 38, 302
Morrison, Scott, 120
Morrison, Sigerson, 499
Morrissey, Brian, 146
Moss, Kate, 431
Mucha, Thomas, 565
Mulally, Alan, 325
Mullman, Jeremy, 30, 533
Muniz, Albert M., 254
Murphy, Patrick, 634
Mustafa, Isaiah, 503
Mycoskie, Blake, 637
Myers, Steven Lee, 601
Myerson, Bruce, 385
Myser, Michael, 577
Nadal, Rafael, 29
Nagle, Thomas T., 391
Narasimhan, Laxman, 301
Narus, James A., 199, 231, 461
Natter, Martin, 385
Naughton, Keith, 486
Neeleman, David, 363
Neff, Jack, 95, 270, 533, 555,
565, 634
Newman, Paul, 634
Ng, David, 95
Nicholson, Kate, 238
Nilekani, Nandan, 601
Nordstrom, John W., 147
Nussbaum, Bruce, 120
Obama, Barack, 2, 3, 381
O’Brien, Denis, 309–10
O’Brien, Jeffrey M., 323
O’Brien, Kevin J., 618
O’Connell, Andrew, 476
O’Connell, Patricia, 322
O’Donnell, Kevin, 316
Ogbogu, Eric, 299

O’Leary, Michael, 385
Olson, Jerry C., 106
Omidayar, Pierre, 411
Orgel, David, 219
Orr, Deborah, 238
Ortega, Amancio, 470
Osbourne, Ozzy, 221, 222, 485
Osgood, Charles, 485
Ottman, Jacquelyn, 83
Owen-Jones, Lindsay, 619
Packard, David, 17
Page, Larry, 30
Palmeri, Christopher, 334
Palmisano, Samuel, 46, 323
Pandit, Vivek, 377
Parasuraman, A., 372, 374, 376
Parish, Janet, 372
Park, Seung Ho, 602
Parks, Bob, 458
Parsons, Jay, 592
Pattison, Kermit, 564
Pauwels, Koen, 256, 385
Pearlstein, Steven, 351
Pemberton, John S., 531
Peppers, Don, 123, 137
Percy, Larry, 482
Perry, Matthew, 578
Peters, Tom, 6
Petrecca, Laura, 565
Petty, Richard, 173
Pfanner, Eric, 295
Pforzheimer, Harry, 121
Pickens, T. Boone, 71
Pierce, Andrew, 316
Piette, Daniel, 471
Pink, Daniel H., 106
Plank, Kevin, 299
Plank, Richard E., 203
Plungis, Jeff, 403
Podmolik, Mary Ellen, 209
Polk, Thad A., 108
Porter, Michael, 34, 51, 232, 289
Postrel, Virginia, 332
Potter, Dave, 555
Powell, Ken, 318
Poynor, Cait, 339
Prahalad, C.K., 76
Prefontaine, Steve, 29
Presley, Elvis, 79
Pringle, Hamish, 149
Procter, William, 269
Proulx, Tom, 120
Pujals, Fernandez, 307
Pujols, Albert, 506
Pullins, Ellen Bolman, 203
Purvis, Scott C., 509
Putin, Vladimir, 600
Quelch, John, 17, 322
Quenqua, Douglas, 238
Quinn, Stephen, 95
Radd, David, 516
Ramstad, Evan, 322

Randall, David K., 334
Rangan, Kash, 432
Rangan, V. Kasturi, 432
Rangaswamy, Arvind, 234
Rapaille, Clotaire, 160
Rashid, Karim, 275
Raux, Caroline, 471
Rayport, Jeffrey, 375, 541
Rayport, Jeffrey F., 278, 542
Reardon, Marguerite, 58
Redden, Joseph P., 339
Regalado, Antonio, 601
Rego, Lopo Leotte, 129
Reibstein, Dave, 116, 402
Reichheld, Frederick, 129
Reid, David A., 203
Rein, Irving, 486
Reinartz, Werner J., 134
Reiss, Robert, 380
Revson, Charles, 7
Richards, Keith, 244, 295
Ries, Al, 265
Rifkin, Glenn, 651
Rigby, Elizabeth, 149
Ringer, Randall, 292
Roberts, Andrew, 619
Roberts, Dexter, 602
Roberts, Kevin, 291
Roberts, Paul, 381
Robinson, Patrick J., 195
Robison, Jennifer, 380
Rockwood, Kate, 448
Roehm, Michelle L., 316
Rogers, Everett M., 481, 589,
590
Rogers, Martha, 123, 137
Romanzi, Ken, 475
Rook, Dennis, 102
Rooney, Jennifer, 46
Rose, Partha, 432
Rossiter, John R., 482
Roth, Rick, 112
Rothenberg, Randall, 565
Rothstein, Edward, 532
Rudnick, Tamar, 339
Ryan, Eric, 275
Sakkab, Nabil, 575
Sanders, Harland, 605
Sanders, Lisa, 112
Sanderude, Scott, 554
Sanserino, Michael, 369
Sawhney, Mohanbir, 46, 47
Scanlon, Jessie, 351
Schau, Hope Jensen, 254
Schewe, Charles D., 220
Schindler, Fred, 555
Schlosser, Julie, 31, 500
Schmitt, Bernd H., 358
Schnaars, Steven, 312
Schonfield, Erick, 444
Schueller, Eugene, 619
Schultz, Howard, 648–49
Schulze, Horst, 379
Schwab, Charles, 485

Schwartz, Barry, 339
Scoller, Martin, 486
Scorsese, Martin, 486
Scott, Lee, 629
Scott, Ridley, 480
Seiders, Kathleen, 372
Seinfeld, Jerry, 94, 282
Seitz, Patrick, 444
Sela, Aner, 339
Selden, Larry, 20
Selden, Yoko Sugiura, 20
Seltman, Kent D., 381
Seno, Alexandra A., 602
Serwer, Andy, 413, 651
Shambora, Jessica, 633
Shankar, Venkatesh, 372
Shapiro, Benson P., 230, 338
Sharapova, Maria, 29
Sharpe, Ashleye, 149
Shasteen, Rhonda, 114
Shatner, William, 486, 487
Shell, Ellen Ruppel, 180
Shervani, Tasadduq A., 256
Sheth, Jag, 630
Shriver, Bobby, 636
Siklosc, Richard, 179
Silverstein, Michael J., 218, 219
Sinegal, Jim, 444
Sinfield, Joe, 121
Sisodia, Raj, 630
Skinner, Jim, 271
Slavens, Roger, 59
Smart, Tim, 30
Smith, Adam, 125, 629
Smith, David J., 75
Smith, Fred, 38
Smith, Michael D., 235
Solomon, Deborah, 444
Soman, Dilip, 339
Sood, Sanjay, 608
Spann, Martin, 385
Spielberg, Steven, 259
Srinivasan, Shuba, 256
Srivastava, Rajendra K., 256
Stafford, Dale, 361
Stafford, Edwin R., 83
Standish, Jeff, 554
Steel, Emily, 209
Steenkamp, Jan-Benedict E. M.,
104, 301, 461
Steiner, Gary A., 481
Stephens, Sammy, 14
Stern, Howard, 486
Sternberg, Brian, 108
Steverman, Ben, 500
Stewart, Thomas A., 211
Stewart, Tony, 524
Stone, Kenneth E., 95
Story, Louise, 533
Stråberg, Hans, 314
Strand, Petra, 499
Stremersch, Stefan, 344
Strong, E. K., 481
Stuart, Jennifer Ames, 134
Stuart, John, 256
Index

I3

Stucky, Nik, 257
Sullivan, Elisabeth, 146, 347
Sunstein, Cass, 176
Sutherland, Kiefer, 486
Sutton, Robert I., 577
Swanson, Scott, 381
Swartz, Jon, 121
Sweeney, Alison, 524
Swift, Taylor, 359
Szaky, Tom, 11
Tannenbaum, Percy, 485
Tax, Stephen, 364
Taylor, Alex, III, 351
Taylor, Catherine P., 31
Taylor, Chris, 120, 444
Taylor, Fred, 413
Tellis, Gerald J., 312–13, 344
Thaler, Richard, 176, 177
Thibodeau, Michael, 292
Thomaselli, Rich, 533
Thompson, Clive, 412
Thompson, Craig, 292
Thompson, Marjorie, 149
Thompson, Stephanie, 634
Tiplady, Rachel, 471
Tischler, Linda, 102, 219, 577
Todé, Chantal, 148
Tomlinson, Richard, 619
Toyoda, Akio, 352
Travis, Daryl, 108
Treece, James B., 353
Trimble, Chris, 76
Trottman, Melanie, 413
Trout, Jack, 265
Trump, Donald, 486
Tuna, Cari, 369
Tybout, Alice M., 316
Underhill, Paco, 458
Urban, Glen L., 203, 412
Van Camp, Scott, 59
Vance, Ashlee, 58
Van Hampton, Steven, 351
Van Heerde, Harald, 316
Vanheule, Marc, 256
Vanhonacker, Wilfried R., 602
Van Rossum, Wouter, 199, 400
Van Stolk, Peter, 136
Vella, Matt, 272
Vence, Deborah L., 108
Villas-Boas, J. Miguel, 339
Vine, Stella, 431
Violino, Bob, 203
Vitharana, Padmal, 344
Volande, Stellene, 334
Vranica, Suzanne, 94, 543
Wagner, Honus, 533
Walsh, Peter, 4
Walton, Sam, 94, 366
Wang, Haiyan, 601
Warhol, Andy, 531
Washkewicz, Donald, 396
I4

Index

Wasserman, Todd, 112
Wasson, Chester R., 317
Watmore, Ian, 209
Watson, Thomas J., Jr., 322
Watson, Thomas J., Sr., 322
Webb, Cynthia L., 59
Weber, John A., 317
Webster, Frederick E., Jr.,
183, 189
Weil, Gilles, 619
Weiss, Allen, 385
Welch, Jack, 210, 307, 628
Wellner, Alison Stein, 102
Wells, Melanie, 651
Wendler, Jim, 575
West, Elizabeth, 444
Westbrook, Robert A., 256
Westlund, Richard, 543
Wexner, Leslie, 217, 454
White, Barry, 136
White, Betty, 496
White, Bobby, 58
White, Shaun, 79, 243, 499
Whitman, Meg, 412
Wieners, Brad, 106
Wierenga, Berend, 134
Wilbur, Kenneth C., 476
Williams, Serena, 523
Williams, Stephen, 239
Williams, Venus, 523
Williamson, Peter J., 76
Wilson, Chip, 241
Wilson, Doug, 55
Wind, Jerry, 234
Wind, Yoram, 183
Winer, Russell S., 388
Winfrey, Oprah, 6, 259, 486
Wingfield, Nick, 592
Wohl, Jessica, 272
Wolcott, Robert C., 46, 47
Wolfe, David B., 630
Wolfinbarger, Mary, 376
Womack, Brian, 564
Wong, Edward, 601
Woodburn, Diana, 555
Woods, Tiger, 29, 209,
297, 486
Worldwide, Arnold, 475
Wouters, Marc, 400
Wuebker, George, 344
Yang, Dori Jones, 649
Yee, Chen May, 381
Yoon, Carolyn, 108
Yoon-woo, Lee, 322
Yoshida, Tatsuo, 352
Zale, Joseph, 391
Zaltman, Gerald, 106, 203
Zaltman, Lindsay, 106
Zarantonello, Lia, 358
Zeithaml, Valarie A., 357, 360,
372, 374, 376
Zellner, Wendy, 651
Zeng, Ming, 76

Zillmer, John, 206
Zimmerman, Ann, 500
Zimmerman, Martin, 353
Zmuda, Natalie, 532
Zook, Chris, 30
Zuckerberg, Mark, 563

Company,
Brand, and
Organization
AAA, 17, 243
AARP, 17
ABB, 183
ABC, 44, 82, 179, 476
Abercrombie & Fitch, 241, 454
Absolut, 225, 346, 390,
508, 509
Accenture, 208–9, 286, 628
Ace Hardware, 216, 369, 450
Acer, 127, 312
AC Milan, 552
A.C. Nielsen Company, 72
Acosta, 197
Act II popcorn, 72
Active, 619
Activia, 568
Activision, 221
Actonel, 574
Acura, Honda, 340
Acushnet, 613
AdBrite, 146
Ad Council, 510
Addison, 495
Adidas, 29, 639
ADM, 280
Adobe Systems Inc., 260, 384,
544, 572
AdSense, 30
Advertising Age, 510
Advocate, The, 191
Adweek’s, 515
AdWords, 30
AdWorks, 31
A8, 525
Aeropostale, 454–55
Aflac, Inc., 507, 508
Ahold, 197, 453
AIG, 316
Airblade, 572
Airbus, 302, 362
Air Jordan, 29
Air Multiplier, 572
Air New Zealand, 51
Air Transport Association, 413
Airtricity, 80
AIX Armani Exchange, 320
AKQA, 515
Akzo Nobel, 199
Alamo Rent-A-Car, 234
Alaska Airlines, 51, 130
Ala soap, 600
Alcatel-Lucent, 202
Alcoa, 11

Aldi, 300, 320, 394, 395, 430,
449, 461
Alexander McQueen, 448
Alibaba, 33, 439, 440
Allen-Bradley Corporation, 572
Allied Van Lines, 359
All Natural Flavors, 261
Allrecipes.com, 12
Allstate, 250, 359, 437, 553
Alpo, 340
Alternative Distribution Alliance
(ADA), 51
Alternative Trading Organization
(ATO), 11
Altoids, 346
Always, 486
Always Infinity, 568
Amazing Race, 637
Amazon.com, 13, 37, 38, 53,
73, 127, 129, 138, 139,
145, 171, 235, 244, 248,
312, 366, 402, 409, 434,
440, 441, 443–44, 447,
449, 546, 608
AmBev, 600
AMD, 263, 305, 341, 409
American Airlines (AA), 99–100,
101, 102, 103, 104, 107,
111, 225, 432
American Apparel, 39, 40
American Automobile
Association (AAA), 17, 243
American Banker, 191
American Beauty, 461
American Business Media, 487
American Cancer Society, 638
American Customer Satisfaction
Index (ACSI), 130
American Eagle, 454
American Express, 45, 98, 129,
130, 144, 191, 281–82,
296–97, 369, 486,
525, 636
American Express Blue, 218,
260, 495
American Express Financial
Advisors, 45
American Family Life Assurance
Company (AFLAC), 507, 508
American Girl dolls, 292
American Heart Association,
636, 637
American Idol, 41, 516, 525, 531
American Legacy
Foundation, 221
American Marketing
Association, 5, 241, 495
American Red Cross, 638
American Society for
Quality, 131
Ameriprise Financial, 45
Amtrak, 232, 375
Amul farmers’ cooperative, 599
Amway, 449, 553
Amy’s Kitchen, 139

Andersen Consulting, 208, 209
Android, 31, 618
Angie’s List, 48
Anheuser-Busch, 90, 263, 551
Animal Planet, 259
Anita Santiago Advertising, 224
Ann Taylor, 453
Ansell Healthcare, 573
AOL, 13, 93, 547
AP, 528
Apple, 12, 30, 46, 83, 93, 94,
119, 127, 129, 130, 142,
167, 225, 248, 249, 280,
292, 307, 312, 330, 332,
344, 377, 390, 421, 443,
472, 516, 528, 547, 569,
576, 589, 591–92, 610,
618, 636
Apple Newton User
Group, 253
Apple stores, 424
Aquafina, 277, 306
ARAMARK, 206
Architect Series II, 333
ArcLight Theater, 276
Ariat, 306
Ariba, 402
Arizona, 305
Armani, 320, 334, 386–87
Armani Exchange, 334
Arm & Hammer, 302
Armstrong World Industries, 568
Arnell Group, 348
Arrow Electronics, 432, 463
Arthur Andersen, 208
ASDA, 300
Associated Grocers, 450
Association of National
Advertisers, 137
Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), 602
Association of Surfing
Professionals (ASP), 253
Aston Martin, 39, 137
AStore, 443
A. T. Cross, 349
Atlanta MGB riders club, 253
Atom processor, Intel, 59
Atra, 263, 532
AT&T, 24, 31, 34, 51, 119, 120,
192, 277, 287, 343, 406,
487, 592, 638
AT&T Mobility, 525
AT&T Wireless, 127
Auchan, 424, 431
Audi, 168, 265, 342, 525
Aunt Jemima, 264
Autobytel.com, 449
Automobile Association, 277
AutoNation, 439
Aveda, 218, 233, 292, 390
Avis, 127, 234, 305,
433, 604
Avon, 217, 420, 430, 449, 490,
553, 557, 636

Avon Breast Cancer
Crusade, 637
Axe, 248, 260, 564, 565
BabyCenter.com, 4
Bacardi, 551
Bajaj Auto, 617
Balance, 277
Bally’s Total Fitness, 156
Bambi, 178
BAND-AID, 464
Bang & Olufsen, 37, 333
BankAmericard, 296
Bank of America, 51, 101, 119,
277, 303, 486, 543,
544, 632
Bank of America Mortgage, 49
Banquet frozen dinners, 394
Barbie doll, 455
Barilla, 127
Barnes & Noble, 37, 358, 441,
443, 457, 622
Barnum’s Animal Crackers, 637
Bartle Bogle Hegarty, 616
B.A.S.S. fishing
tournaments, 525
Bass Pro Shops, 457
Bath & Body Works, 218–19
Baxter Healthcare, 331, 403
Bayer aspirin, 328, 595
Bayerische Motoren Werke
AG, 238
BBDO, 483, 496
BB&T Corp., 525
Beanie Babies, 527
BearingPoint, 129
Becton, Dickinson and
Company, 628
Bed Bath & Beyond, 214, 459
Beef ‘O’ Brady’s sports pub, 450
Beiersdorf, 527
Beijing Automotive, 596
Beijing Olympics, 515
BellaSugar, 547
Bell Laboratories, 84
Benetton, 453, 455, 459, 598
BENGAY aspirin, 245
Ben & Jerry’s, 24, 527, 621
BeoLab 8000 speakers, 333
Berkeley, 270
Berkshire Hathaway, 512
Berry, Parasuraman, and
Zeithaml, 372
Bert Claeys, 278
Bertolli, 277–78
Best Buy, 24, 37, 71, 83, 112,
197, 299, 331, 340, 349,
417, 424, 432, 433, 455,
471–72, 577, 592, 630
Best Value Inn, 219
Betavine, Vodafone, 53
Better Business Bureau, 405
Betty Crocker, 250
BIC, 267
BIC for Men perfume, 267

BIC Sport for Men perfume, 267
Big Bertha, 278
Big Lots, 401
Big Mac, 607
Bijan on Rodeo Drive, 456
Billabong, 265
Bill Me Later, 412
Bing, 33, 94, 127, 249, 542
Bisquick, 261
Bissell, 581–82
Biz360, 72
Bizrate.com, 73, 135
BlackBerry, 45, 441, 592–93,
601, 618
BlackBerry 850, 593
BlackBerry Enterprise
Server, 593
Black & Decker, 265
Blendtec, 550
Blockbuster, 47, 139, 415, 433,
458, 486, 622
Blogger Weblog, 384
Bloomingdale’s, 218, 434, 449,
450, 455, 457
Blue Cross Blue Shield, 130,
243, 299
Blue Man Group, 58
Blue Ribbon Sports, 29
Blue Sky Studios, 42
BMW, 13, 15, 21, 37, 46, 72,
130, 238–39, 254, 263,
283, 329, 339, 366, 390,
568, 576, 598, 630, 636
BMW AG, 341
Bobbi Brown, 435
The Body Shop, 24, 302, 449,
459, 546, 598, 634
Boeing, 114, 165, 186, 302, 333,
362, 527
Bold, 337
Bolsa Mexicana de Valores, 599
Bon Appetit, 511
Bono cookies, 600
Boost Mobile, 222
Boots, 300
Booz Allen Hamilton, 98, 426
Booz & Company, 319
Borat, 614
Borders, 37, 457, 459
Born to Fit 1969 Premium
Jeans, 478
Bosch, 314
Boston Bruins, 533
Boston Celtics, 253
Boston Consulting Group,
599, 601
Boston Market, 271
Bounce Extra Soft, 568
Bounty, 218, 320, 337
Bounty Basic, 218, 340
Bowflex, 418, 420
Bowmar, 312
BP, 253, 303, 528, 634
The Brand Union, 495
Braun, 332

Bravo, 44, 225
Bridge Worldwide, 495
Brim coffee, 316
British Airways, 12, 301, 634,
635, 650
British Telecom, 291
Brooks & Dunn country music
tour, 525
Brookstone, 455
BSkyB, 42
BT Cellnet, 291
Bud Light, 305, 505
Budweiser, 90, 263
Bugaboo stroller, 77
Build-A-Bear Workshop, 141
Bulgari, 334
Burberry, 156, 259, 288
Bureau of Industry and
Security, 604
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 355
Burger King, 137, 138, 283, 433,
458, 541
Burlington Northern Santa Fe
Railway, 200
Burson-Marsteller, 487, 495
Burton, 221, 243, 252–53
Burton’s White Collection, 243
Burt’s Bees, 82
Busch Bavarian, 263
Busch Series, 524
BusinessWeek, 6, 57, 179,
190, 211, 238, 295, 297,
424, 618,
Butterball Turkey, 362
Butterball University, 362
Buy.com, 439
BuzzMetrics, 73
BzzAgent, 15, 550–51
Cabela’s, 46, 138
Cable & Wireless, 309
Cadbury-Schweppes, 265,
551, 598
Cadillac, 260, 280, 283,
485, 596
Caesars Entertainment, 123
Caesars Palace, 123
CafeMom, 548
CafePress, 329
California Milk Processor Board
(CMPB), 224, 506
Callaway Golf, 278, 422
Calvin Klein, 334, 438
Calyx & Corolla, 424
Camay, 337
Camden Place, 595
Campbell Hausfeld, 112
Campbell Soup, 12, 41, 225,
258, 261, 312, 432, 608
Camry, 260, 352, 607
Canon, 5, 36, 37, 127, 305,
618, 627
Capital E, Levi’s, 218
Capital One, 145
Cardinal Health, 200, 377
Index

I5

Care Bear worksheets, 236
Cargill, 639
CarMax, 291, 630
Carnation, 567
Carnival Connections, 21
Carnival Cruises, 540
Carrefour, 197, 417, 431,
449, 613
Carrier, 40, 262
Carson Products, 619
Carson’s, 434
CarSpace.com, 13
Cartier, 334
Case, 125
Casino, 424
Casio, 220
Caster & Pollux, 633
Caterpillar, 37, 39, 83, 119,
125–26, 183, 194, 350–51,
375, 398–99, 428, 630
CavinKare, 611
CBS, 476, 477
C-class, Mercedes-Benz, 218
CDW, 539
Celebrity Big Brother, 506
Celeron, 263
Celta, General Motors, 47
Celtel, 601
Cemex of Mexico, 196, 330,
331, 599
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 638
Central Contractor Registration
(CCR), 207
Centrino, 58
Centrino Duo, 58
Century 21, 319
Chanel, 243, 280, 455
Chang Soda, 513
Chapman Kelly, 204, 205
Charles Schwab, 365
Charles Schwab Bank, 365
Charmin, 337
Charmin Basic, 218, 340
Chase Home Mortgage, 49
Cheer, 303, 328, 337
Cheerios, 67, 127, 286
Cheesybite, 507
Cheetos snacks, 113
Chef America, 567
ChemConnect.com, 197
Cherokee, 149
Chevrolet, 168, 263
Chicago Cubs, 509
Chicken of the Sea, 141, 142
Chick-fil-A, 220
Chik shampoo, 611
The Children’s Place, 433
Chipotle Mexican Grill, 271, 633
Chips Ahoy!, 631
Chiquita bananas, 328
Choice Hotels International, 17
Christian Dior, 613
Chrysler, 112, 160, 197, 485
Cincinnati Bell, 377
I6

Index

Cinderella, 178
Circle K, 425, 449
Circuit City, 51, 258, 472, 592
Cirque du Soleil, 279, 355
Cisco Connected Sports, 57
Cisco Systems Inc., 47, 57–58,
78, 202, 290, 377, 394, 575,
576, 605
Citibank, 214, 316, 366,
458, 600
Citibank AAdvantage credit
card, 344
Citigroup, 149, 277, 297
Citizens Bank, 433
Clairol, 127, 609
Clamato, 90
Classic Coke, 242
Cleanest Line, The, 15
Cleveland Clinic, 422
Click-to-Call, 31
Clinique, 127, 233, 435
Clorox, 116, 130, 156, 302, 633
Clorox Disinfecting Wipes, 318
Clorox Green Works, 82–83, 395
Clothes Off Our Back
Foundation, 524
Cloud computing, 31
Club Green Kids, 253
Club Med, 37, 213, 543
Club Méditerranée, 213
CMI Marketing, 548
CNN, 157, 528
Coach, 218, 434, 444, 452
Coca-Cola, 233, 242, 257, 258,
278, 293, 312, 333, 406,
409, 416, 433, 438, 449,
455, 466, 498, 505, 524,
525, 531–32, 544, 596, 598,
599, 604, 607, 610, 611,
615, 617, 629, 631, 633
Code Blue Recycling, 421
Cognos, 205
Cohn & Wolfe, 495
Coke, 72, 74, 306, 307, 603
Colgate, 116, 216, 496
Colgate Junior toothpaste, 236
Colgate-Palmolive, 156, 234,
236, 587, 598, 599
Columbia Business School, 20
Columbia/HCA, 403
Columbia House, 424
Columbia Records, 363
Columbia University, 134
Comcast, 210, 363, 547
Comedy Central, 217, 565
Comet, 320
Comfort Inn, 326
Commander, Jeep, 516
Commerce Bank, 630
CommonHealth, 495
Compaq, 167, 323, 346
Compass, Jeep, 112
Complaints.com, 73
CompUSA, 452, 472
ComputerLand, 323

ComScore, 542
Comtrex, 348
ConAgra Foods, 72, 101,
288, 394
ConMed, 465
Consol Energy, 185
Constellation Brands, 227, 340
Consumer & Market Knowledge
(CMK), Procter &
Gamble, 98
Consumer Reports, 171
ConsumerReview.com, 73
Container Store, 451, 630
Continental Airlines, 224,
406, 477
Continental’s Lite, 301
Contract Freighters, 399
Converse, 30, 137, 220, 506, 636
CoolSavings.com, 520
Cool Water, 346
Cooper and Kleinschmidt,
569–70
Cooperative chain store, 609
Coors, 162, 609
Coors Light, 127, 305
Corian®, 345
Corn Flakes, 307
Corn Flakes, Kellogg, 261
Corolla, 352
Corona, 220
Corporación GEO, 599
Corus Group, 595
Corvette, Chevy, 283
Costco, 37, 214, 218, 320, 417,
444–45, 449, 464, 468, 471,
553, 630
Costco.com, 129
Coupons.com, 520, 522
Courtyard by Marriott, 120, 581
Cover Girl Outlast, 137, 585
Covisint, 197
Cox Communications, 130
Cracker Jack cereal, 245
Craftsman tools, 125
Crayola, 264, 290, 527
Crest, 174, 216, 269, 303, 327,
337, 342, 610
Crest Neat Squeeze, 119
Crest Rejuvenating Effects, 154
Crest Whitestrips, 234, 265, 270
Crisco oil and shortening,
320, 461
Crocs, 74, 546
Crowne Plaza, 341
CSR, 343–44
Culinary Institute of Tuscany, 251
Cummins, 184
Curves, 214, 430
Cutler-Hammer, 198
CVS, 14, 441, 449, 458
Dacron Polyester, 68
Daewoo Motors, 595
Daisy Fuentes, 452
Dallas Cowboys, 57

Dannon, 168, 260–61
Danone, 568
Dan-o-nino, 261
Dasani, 277, 306
Dash, 337
DATA, 636
Davy Crockett, 178
Dawn, 634
Daypop, 576
Dayton Hudson, 436
DDM Italia, 309
De Beers, 334
Deep Blue, 323
Deere & Company, 141
Delhaize, 453
Del.icio.us, 13, 33
Dell, 14, 18, 53, 124, 136, 167,
170, 197, 300, 312, 320,
323, 332, 346, 398, 429,
432, 468, 539, 547,
613, 636
Dell Experience Design
Group, 332
Del Monte, 109
Deloitte Consulting, 145
Delphi, 184
Delta Airlines, 231, 524
Department of Defense NetworkCentric Warfare, 47
Department of Homeland
Security, 294
Department of
Transportation, 638
Departments of Health, Social,
and Human Services, 638
Desperate Housewives, 516
Deutsche Post DHL, 39
Deutsche Securities Ltd., 352
Developer Connection, 418
DeWALT, 265
DeWitt Company, 192
Diageo, 568
Dial-a-Mattress, 417
Diamond Safety, 173
Dick’s Sporting Goods, 13, 309
Diebold RemoteTeller
System, 47
DieHard, 250
Digg, 13
Digicel Group, 309–10, 603
DiGiorno, 288
Dillard’s, 434
Dior, 438
Diovan, 460
Direct Line Insurance, 301
Direct Marketing Association, 537
DIRECTV, 130, 484
Discount Tire, 30–31, 436
Discover Card, 127
Discovery Channel, 125, 551
Discovery Communications, 259
Disney, 15, 37, 43, 44, 46, 47,
51, 146, 178–79, 253, 257,
265, 285–86, 358, 361, 366,
433–34, 436

Disney Channel, 44, 178, 179
Disney Consumer Products, 179
Disneyland Paris, 609
Disney Media Networks, 179
Disney Parks and Resorts, 179
Disney Stores, 433
Display Supply & Lighting, 424
Dixons, 417
Dockers, 74
Dockers, Levi’s, 551
DOCOMO, 441
Dodge Caliber, 112
Dogster, 13, 570
Dolby, 345
Dole, 328, 639
Dollar General, 219, 401,
423, 449
Dollar Tree, 401
Dominick’s, 627
Domino’s, 4, 127, 136, 168–69,
276, 307, 308, 484
Donald Duck, 285
Doritos, 137, 506
Dos Equis beer, 486
DOS operating system, 93
DoubleClick, 31
Dove, 564, 565
Dove Body Wash, 565
Dove Intensive Firming
Cream, 565
Dove Lotion, 565
Dow, 572
Dow Chemical, 84
Downy, 629–30
Downy Single Rinse, 576
Dreft, 337
Dreyer’s Ice Cream, 529, 567
Dreyer’s Slow Churned Limited
Editions, 529
Dr. Pepper Snapple Group,
130, 489
Dryel, 270
Duet washer, 218
Dulux household paint, 227
Dun & Bradstreet, 198, 538
Dunkin’ Donuts, 15, 38, 127,
263, 282, 441–42, 459,
520, 551
Dunnhumby, 144
DuPont, 44, 68, 106, 183, 201,
345, 553, 632, 642
DuPont Building Innovations, 46
DuPont’s Performance Materials
group, 85
DuPont Tyvek, 85
Dyson, 77
Eagle Snacks, 316
Earthkeepers, 621
EasyJet, 301
Eaton, 319
Eats, Shoots and Leaves, 551
EBay, 4, 5, 13, 37, 146, 235,
249, 402, 411–12, 440, 468,
513, 608, 613, 630

EBeanstalk.com, 222
Eddie Bauer, 536
Edison Electric Light
Company, 210
Edmund’s, 9
Edward Jones, 366
E. F. Hutton & Co., 296
Elaine’s restaurant, 276
Elance.com, 73
Electrolux, 37, 314, 339, 449,
490, 609
Element, 217
Eli Lilly, 119, 570
Elixir acoustic guitar strings, 569
Ellen DeGeneres Show, The, 14
Ellen Tracy, 41
Elmo TMX dolls, 74
ELPH, 5
Embraer, 600
EMC, 377
Emerson Electric, 189
Emerson Process
Management, 205
EMI, 313
Emirates, 524
Emporio Armani, 320, 334, 636
EmSense, 108
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 40
Energizer, 280
Energy Brands, 293
Enterprise Rent-A-Car, 37, 46,
129, 145, 234
Entertainment Weekly, 276
Envirosell, 458
Eon Labs, 460
Epinions.com, 73, 135
Equal, 280, 510
ER, 578
Era, 337
Ericsson, 10, 628
Esat Telecom Group PLC, 309
Escape SUV, Ford, 516
ESOMAR, 98
ESPN (Entertainment and Sports
Programming Network), 43,
44, 179, 217, 565
ESPN Zone, 43, 292
Esquire, 458
Estée Lauder, 233, 384,
435, 436, 458, 461, 540,
615, 636
Ethos bottled water, 649
E*TRADE, 13, 320
E*TRADE Financial, 300
Euro Disney theme park, 609
European Commission, 84
European Union, 84, 145–46,
206, 602
Ever Clear, 260
Evian, 340, 406
EVilla Internet appliance,
Sony, 333
Evista, 570
Evolution, 565
Excedrin, 484

Excel, 93
Excursion, Ford, 21
Expedia, 130, 370
Export-Import Bank of the
United States, 604
Extra Strength Tylenol, 340
ExxonMobil’s On the
Run, 425
FAA, 211
FabSugar, 547
Facebook, 3, 13, 58, 115, 121,
146, 186, 248, 270, 520,
546, 548, 563–64, 565
FairPoint Communications, 305
Family Dollar, 197, 401,
423, 449
Fast & Furious, 44
FASTPASS, Disney, 361
Febreze, 270, 533
Federal Trade Commission, 108,
405, 539, 540, 547
Federated Department
Stores, 450
FedEx, 38, 48, 130, 183, 191,
303, 304, 366
Feed America, 500
Fendi, 280, 438
Ferragamo watch, 334
Fiat, 259
Fiberglass, 250
Fidelity Investments, 130,
145, 280
Fiesta, 552
Fiesta, Ford, 325, 550
FIFA World Cup, 531
Fila, 258
Financial Times, 211
Finesse, 306
Fingerhut, 143, 144
Firefox, 94
Fireman’s Fund, 250
First Direct, 301
Fisher & Paykel dishwasher, 218
Fisher-Price, 77
Fit, 217
Fitch, 495
Flex, Ford, 243
Flex SUV, Ford, 325
Flickr, 13, 33, 250
Flirt, 461
Fluke, 574
Fnac, 431
Folgers, 282, 316, 400, 513
Folgers coffee, 320
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 84, 349
Food Lion, 441
Food Marketing Institute, 437
Food Network, 12
Foot Locker, 29–30, 243
Forbes, 190
Ford Motor Company, 119, 197,
200, 201, 204, 288, 305,
325, 433, 525, 552, 636

Forest Stewardship Council
(FSC), 464, 639
Forrester Research, 90
Fort Howard Paper Co., 569
Fortis, 250
Fortune, 186, 190, 209,
297, 412, 413, 445, 511,
591, 593
42BELOW, 250
Fossil Group Australia, 70
4sight, Inc., 101
Four Points by Sheraton, 262
Four Seasons Hotels, 135, 326,
364, 366
Fox Network, 41, 42
Fox News, 42, 249
Fox Searchlight Pictures, 42
Franklin Mint, 420, 536
Frappuccino® coffee, 301
Freakonomics, 551
FreeMarkets.com, 402
Fresh & Easy (gourmet
minisupermarkets), 431
Fresh Ink, Hallmark, 233
Friends, 578
Friends of the Earth, 80
Frito-Lay, 80, 290, 348, 506
Frito-Lay lemonade, 245
Fruit Blends, 261
Fruit of the Loom (laundry
detergent), 245
Fruit on the Bottom, 261
Fruit Rings, 307
FSN, 42
FTD, 543
Fuel, 217
Fuji, 409
Fujitsu Laboratories, 101
Fulfillment by Amazon
(FBA), 443
Fusion, Ford, 325
Fusion, Gillette, 532
Fusion Power, 40
The Futures Company, 495
Futures Group, 90
F.W. Woolworth, 384
FX, 42
Gain, 303, 328, 337, 519
Gallo Family Vineyards, 340
Gallup, 82
Gallup & Robinson Inc., 518
GameStop, 448
Gap, 103, 340, 386, 447, 450,
453, 455, 458, 470,
478, 636
Garmin GPS, 254
Garnier Fructis, 346
Gartner Group, 90
Gateway, 170, 207
Gatorade, 101, 299, 306,
552, 629
Gawker Media, 547
GCI Health, 495
GE. See General Electric (GE)
Index

I7

Geek Squad, 112, 331, 471–72
GE Healthcare, 129, 332, 377
GEICO, 290, 477, 511–12
GE Lighting, 385
GE Money, 605
General Electric (GE), 34, 41, 76,
98, 101, 129, 145, 183, 197,
200, 210–11, 257, 261, 290,
307, 313, 319, 322, 331,
340, 344, 377, 496, 568,
598, 628, 633
General Electric Design for Six
Sigma (DFSS), 47
General Electric Medical
Systems, 20
General Electric Plastics, 136
General Foods, 113, 610, 642
General Mills, 67, 223, 224, 261,
318, 344, 394, 464, 572,
587, 627, 631
General Motors (GM), 15, 168,
197, 201, 224, 233, 260,
270, 280, 305, 332, 352,
437, 504
General Motors OnStar,
46, 377
General Services Administration
Procurement Data Center,
206, 207
Gerber, 39, 316, 567
GfK Roper Consulting, 82
Ghg, 495
GI Joe, 342
Gillette, 46, 98, 243, 263, 269,
302, 332, 384, 400, 409,
432, 455, 532–33, 557,
568, 636
Gilt.com, 451
Giorgio Armani, 320, 334
Giorgio Armani Privé, 320, 334
Givenchy, 448
Give the Gift of Sight, 636
Glacéau, 293
GlaxoSmithKline, 72, 460, 547
Gleem, 337
Gleevec, 460
The Global Fund, 636
Glory, 581–82
GM. See General Motors (GM)
GMMB, 3
GO Corporation, 286, 287
Godiva chocolate, 330
Go International, 499
Gol, 599
Goldfinger, 533
Goldman Sachs, 639
Gold Medal flour, 261
Goodby, Silverstein &
Partners, 506
Good Housekeeping,
583–84
Good Morning America, 528
Good Skin, 461
Goodyear, 184, 207, 253, 399,
436, 610
I8

Index

Google, 30–31, 32, 33, 37, 38,
47, 50, 94, 120, 125, 127,
129, 130, 248, 257, 292,
302, 306, 422, 542, 574,
575, 608, 618, 630, 631
Google Alerts, 31
Google Analytics, 30, 31
Google Android, 322
Google Calendar, 31
Google Chrome, 31
Google Code, 31
Google Dictionary, 31
Google Docs, 31
Google Earth, 31
Google Gadgets, 31
Google Maps, 31
Google Scholar, 31
Google Sky, 31
Google Toolbar, 31
Google Trends, 31
Google Video, 31, 202, 549
Google Voice, 31
Go Red for Women, 637
GORE-TEX, 289, 457, 569
GORETEX water-resistant
fibers, 345
GQ, 565
Grace Performance
Chemicals, 72
Grainger, 196, 200, 432,
463–64
Grameenphone, 599
Gran Turismo, 341
Grassroots, 461
Great Harvest Bread, 450
Green and Wind, 581
Green Mountain Coffee
Roasters, 632
Green Mountain Energy, 46
Greenopolis, 421
Greenpeace, 631, 632
Green Works, 633
Grey, 495
Grey Goose, 127, 218, 390, 551
Greyhound, 232
Grey’s Anatomy, 516
Grocery Manufacturers of
America, 437
Grolsch beer, 636
Groupe Danone, 598
Grupo Elektra, 599
Grupo Salinas, 599
GT Bicycles, 438
G2, 264, 495
Gucci, 156, 243, 334, 425,
595, 611
Gymboree, 454
Häagen-Dazs, 340, 370, 615
Haier, 18, 314, 601, 615
Hallmark, 224, 233, 244, 312,
364, 527, 610, 636
Hallmark Business
Expressions, 233
Hallmark Warm Wishes, 233

Halston, 334
Hamburger Helper, 67, 159, 394
Hamburger University, 331,
450, 451
Hamilton Sundstrand, 262
Hanes, 304
Hangover, The, 6
Hannah Montana, 179
Happy Meals, 607
Harley-Davidson, 37, 141, 221,
249, 254, 259, 307, 330,
440–41, 488, 576, 630
Harley-Davidson Owner’s Group
(H.O.G.), 253, 254, 576
HarperCollins, 42
Harrah’s Entertainment, 123
Harrods of London, 455
Harry and David, 424
Harry Potter (novel), 165
Hartford, 250
Harvard Business School, 106
Harvard University, 17, 18, 34,
134, 270, 432, 563
Hasbro, 259, 342, 343,
548, 551
Havaianas, 600
Hawaiian Airlines, 516
Haworth and Atlas Copco, 432
Head & Shoulders, 533
Head & Shoulders Intensive
Treatment, 504
Healthy Choice, 288
HEB, 432
Heineken, 551, 552, 600,
607, 615
Heinz, 15, 206, 258, 261,
301, 327, 506
Helene Curtis, 306, 611
Hendrix UTD, 200
Hennessy, 295
Henry Schien, 539
Herbal Essences, 280
Herman Miller, 101
Hermès, 280, 334, 612
Hershey, 290, 527, 568
Hershey Kisses, 260
Hertz, 191, 234, 385, 422, 433
Hess Corporation, 40
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 17, 36,
45, 58, 83, 167, 183, 186,
192, 196, 197, 204, 243,
261, 287, 312, 331, 332,
339, 343, 384, 398, 416,
428, 574, 627
HEXAL, 460
Highland Park Hospital, 200
Hill & Knowlton, 495
Hills Brothers, 567
Hilton Doubletree Hotels, 359
Hilton Hotels, 98, 130, 370
History Channel, 125
Hitachi, 125, 344
H. J. Heinz Company, 130, 506,
631, 632
H&M, 386, 431, 447, 470, 633

Hog Tales (magazine), 254
Hole in the Wall Gang, 634
Holiday Inn, 341, 450
Holiday Inn Express, 341
Holiday Inn Select, 341
Holland Binkley Company, 200
Home Depot, 12, 112, 127, 130,
131–32, 144, 214, 305, 447,
448, 452, 525
Honda, 37, 140, 217, 261, 340,
484, 516, 607, 614, 630
Honest Tea, 12, 633
Honeywell, 200, 322
Hong Kong and Shanghai
Banking Corporation
Limited, 237
Hong Kong International
Airport, 477
Hoover, 490
Hormel, 320
Hormel Compleats, 263–64
Hotel del Sol, 157
Hotels.com, 439
Hot Topic, 153–54, 454
Houlihan’s, 458
House of Hoops, 29–30
Howard Johnson, 433
HP. See Hewlett-Packard (HP)
H&R Block, 359
HSBC, 237–38, 301, 607
HSN, 449
H2OH!, 302
Hudson Institute, 90
Huggies Supreme Natural
Fit, 97
Hulu.com, 41, 42, 44
Hurley, 220
Hush Puppies, 546
Hyatt, 191, 225, 604
Hyatt Regency, 290
Hydro Quebec, 573
Hyperion, 44
Hyundai, 130, 131, 524, 596
Iams Company, 269, 290
IBM, 46, 58, 93, 98, 101, 146,
170, 183, 191, 192, 197,
200, 205, 209, 253, 257,
302, 313, 322–23, 331, 344,
346, 377, 384, 428, 487,
493, 496, 543, 557, 608,
622, 627, 628, 639
IC, 184
I Can’t Believe It’s Not
Butter, 485
ICE theaters, 236
ICI, 227
ICI Explosives, 200
Idea Center at Kodak
Gallery, 547
IDEO, 119–20, 219, 332,
569, 630
IEG Sponsorship Report, 524
IGN Entertainment, 42
IHS Global Insight, 90

IKEA, 5, 35, 37, 83, 179–80,
219, 248, 320, 400, 431,
453, 528, 600, 611–12,
630, 639
Illinois Tool Works (ITW), 308
IMac, 591
InBev, 600
Inc., 191, 275
Independent Grocers Alliance
(IGA), 450
Independent News & Media, 306
Infiniti, 614
Information Resources
Inc., 72
Infosys, 78, 600
InfoUSA, 198
ING, 301
ING Direct, 301
Innocent, 248
INSEAD, 278
Inside Edge Ski and
Bike, 449
Institute for Supply
Management, 185
Institute for the Future, 90
Intel, 58–59, 101, 170, 183, 257,
263, 304, 305, 323, 341,
346, 409, 416, 576, 622
Intel Core i7, 59
Interactive Media, 179
Interbrand, 211, 238, 295,
297, 618
Intercontinental Hotels Group,
109, 127, 341
International, 184
International Advertising
Festival, 565
International Business Machines
Corporation (IBM). See IBM
International Consumer
Electronics Show, 523
International Flavors &
Fragrances, 576
International Olympic
Committee, 29
Internet Explorer Web browser,
31, 93, 94
Intuit, 120–21, 129, 145, 479,
546, 547
Iowa State University, 95
IPad, 589, 591
IPhone, 30, 127, 390, 441, 544,
550, 591, 618
IPod, 30, 46, 336, 377, 472,
591, 636
IRI, 99
Iron Man 2, 525
Islands (magazine), 157
ISnack 2.0, 507
IStockphoto, 575
ITouch, 30
ITunes, 235, 443
ITunes Music Store, 591
Ivory Snow, 337
Ivory soap, 269

Jack Daniels, 616–17
Jack in the Box, 103
Jaguar, 239, 330, 385
Jamba Juice, 42, 358
Jamestown Container
Companies, 326–27
Janie and Jack, 454
Java software, 306
JCPenney, 156, 449, 451,
454, 459
J.Crew, 127, 241
J.D. Power and Associates, 100,
126, 129, 130, 131, 171,
329, 596
Jeep, 112, 261, 516
Jeffrey Boutiques, 148
Jell-O, 250
Jenny Craig, 485, 567
JetBlue Airways, 191, 300, 316,
363, 630
Jewel food stores, 409
Jewel-Osco, 449
Jianlibao, 599
Jif, 320, 461
Jiffy Lube, 450
Jigsaw, 198
Jimlar, 434
Jimmy Choo, 448
Joe Boxer, 452
John Deere, 39, 107, 125, 141,
340, 364, 375, 487, 488,
599–600
Johnson Controls, 377
Johnson & Johnson, 4, 43–44,
222, 290, 316, 464, 543,
549, 551, 570–71, 572, 630,
631, 639, 642, 643
John Wanamaker, 384
Joie de Vivre, 157, 158
Jones, 15
Jones Apparel, 130
Jones Soda, 15, 136, 254
Jordan’s Furniture, 291, 630
Journeys, Hallmark, 233
Jour perfume, 267
Juicy Couture, 41, 250
Jumpcut, 33
Justice Department, 121
Justin Boots, 306
JWT, 495
Kansas City Royals, 57
Kantar Group, 99
Kaplan Thaler, 507
Kate Spade, 41
Kayak, 370
KB Toys, 53
KC Masterpiece barbecue
sauce, 345
K-Cups, 632
Keebler, 250
Kelkoo, 33
Kellogg, 261, 290, 610
Kendall-Jackson, 218, 580
Kentucky Fried Chicken, 224

Kenworth, 399, 580
Ketchum, 528, 529
Kevlar®, 345
KeyBank, 369
KFC Corporation, 344,
604–5, 635
Kia, 128, 524, 596
Kid Connection, 629
Kiehl’s skin care, 218
Kimberly-Clark, 97, 264,
478, 487
Kinder Surprise, 578
Kindle, 443
Kinepolis megaplex, 278
Kirkland Signature, 444
KitKat, 631, 632
Kitty Litter, 250
Kiwi shoe polish, 346, 347
Kleenex, 97, 250, 264
KLM’s Buzz, 301
Kmart, 44, 301, 425, 447, 449,
452, 456, 499
Kodak, 36, 193, 207, 287, 340,
409, 421, 432, 547, 569,
576, 622
Kodak Funtime Film, 340
Kohler, 332, 527
Kohl’s, 130, 219, 452, 457,
459, 461
Komatsu, 125, 126, 351
Komatsu Heavy Equipment, 576
Konica e-mini M, 288
Kotex, 97
KPMG, 72
Kraft, 12, 110, 145, 225, 290,
461, 464, 506, 522, 523,
572, 598, 609, 615, 631
Krispy Kreme, 546
Kroger, 72, 144, 449, 464
KTTV Los Angeles, 42
K2R, 581–82
Kuerig, 632
Kuhn Loeb Inc., 296
Kurt Salmon Associates, 387
Lambie-Nairn, 495
Lance Armstrong Foundation,
29, 635–36
Landor Associates, 186, 495
Land Rover, 248
Lands’ End, 136, 329, 406, 449,
466, 536
Lane Bryant, 455
Last Minute, 51
Las Vegas Convention & Visitors
Authority, 6, 7
Laundry, 41
Lauren Conrad, 452
Lavoris, 585
Lawry’s Seasoned Salt, 224
Lay’s, 345, 615
La-Z-Boy, 288
Lean, Mean, Fat-Reducing
Grilling Machine, 485
Lean Cuisine, 250

LeapFrog, 527
Lear Corporation, 204
Leclerc, 424
Lee Jeans, 636
Legend, 18
L’eggs, 224
LEGO, 37, 151, 248, 551, 576
Lehman Brothers, 296
Leica Surveying and
Engineering, 111
Lenovo Group, 18, 323, 601
LensCrafters, 636
Le Parisien, 565
Levi’s, 157, 225, 265, 329
Levi Strauss, 218, 576
LexisNexis, 34
Lexus, 130, 131, 145, 340, 352,
422, 516, 596
LG Electronics, 22, 248, 314,
488, 489, 616
Lidl, 449, 461
Lifetime, 217
The Limited, 449, 453
Limited Brands, 217, 454
Lincoln Electric, 200
Linens n’ Things, 316
LinkedIn, 121, 198, 548
Linksys, 57
Linux, 384
Lipitor, 243
Lipton, 342
Listerine, 585
Liverpool Street Station, 506
LIVESTRONG, 29
Liz Claiborne, 41, 250
L.L.Bean, 449, 536, 537, 630
Loan Bright, 49–50
Loblaw’s Decadent Chocolate
Chip Cookie, 460
Loblaw’s Supermarkets,
451, 460
Local Motors, Wareham,
Massachusetts, 109
Local Static, 154
Logo, 225
London Business School,
115, 461
Lone Star, 259
Lord of the Rings, The, 614
Lord & Taylor, 434, 459
L’Oréal, 619
The Lost Ring, 515
Louis Vuitton, 243, 244, 280,
295, 334, 438, 471, 568,
595, 613
Love Bug, The, 178
Lowe’s, 112, 132, 197, 214,
305, 448
Lowestfare, 51
LSI Logic Corporation, 576
Lucent, 186
Lucky Brand Jeans, 41
Lufthansa, 51, 119
Lululemon, 241
Lumber Liquidators, 448
Index

I9

Luna bars for women, 277
Lunchables, 345
Luvs, 270, 303, 337, 400
Luxottica, 636, 637
LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis
Vuitton, 295, 612
Lycra®, 345
M.A.C., 233
Macaroni Grill, 74
Mach3, Gillette, 46, 263,
400, 532
Macromedia, 384
Macy’s, 144, 165, 434, 450,
455, 459
Maggi dried noodles, 76
Maharaja Mac, 607
Mahindra Motors, 595
Mahogany, Hallmark, 224, 233
MailMate, 514
Major League Baseball,
533, 636
Maker’s Mark, 15
Makino, 205
Mango, 447
Marchon, 434
Marc Jacobs, 448
Marine Stewardship
Council, 639
Marketing News, 112
Marks & Spencer, 443,
452, 459
Marlboro, 290
Marquis Jets, 370
Marriott, 119, 120, 366, 370,
389, 604
Mars, 98, 144
Martha Stewart Living, 157
The Martin Agency, 512
Mary Kay Cosmetics, 38, 114,
127, 449, 553
Mary Poppins, 178
MasterCard, 248–49, 296, 297
Matrix, 485
Matsushita, 57, 313, 598
Max Factor, 269
Maxim, 217, 565
Maxim’s, 650
Maxus, 495
Maybelline, 286
Mayo Clinic, 119, 380–81
Maytag, 330
MBNA, 297
McDonald’s, 10, 15, 24, 37, 51,
137, 154, 222, 242, 257,
271–72, 282, 283, 285, 292,
299, 320, 331, 361, 366,
415, 427, 430, 433, 450,
451, 458, 459, 484, 515,
516, 520, 527, 541, 604,
605, 607, 611, 615, 636
McGraw-Hill, 185
McKesson Corporation, 143
McKinsey & Company, 53, 209
McNeil Nutritionals, 510
I10

Index

MD Moms, 552
Me2U, 601
Medco, 44
Mederma, 290
Mediabrand, 90
MediaCom, 495
Mediaedge:cia, 495
Mediamark Research &
Intelligence, 82
Medicine Shoppe, 130
Medline, 194, 200
Meetup, 3
Meijer, 449, 464
Men’s Health, 74, 217
Mercedes-Benz, 10, 67, 130,
218, 239, 241, 327, 329,
340, 427, 540
Merck, 43–44, 243, 632
Merial Limited, 44
Merisant, 510
Merrill Lynch, 301, 316,
359, 553
Method Products, 275
Metro, 613
Metro International, 39
Mexx, 41
Miami Dolphins, 57
Michelin, 250, 336
Michigan Economic
Development Corporation
(MEDC), 69
Mickey Mouse, 178, 285
Microsoft, 31, 33, 46, 50, 58, 76,
78, 93–94, 121, 129, 146,
192, 232–33, 249, 257, 289,
299, 302, 303, 304, 306,
323, 341, 384, 422, 428,
598, 622, 631
Microsoft Office, 93, 94, 289
Microsoft Windows Mobile, 322
Midas Muffler, 378
Migros, 609
Miller Brewing, 253
Miller Lite, 281, 305, 505
Milliken & Company, 143, 576
Millward Brown International,
264, 495, 519
Mindshare, 495
MINI Cooper, 21, 292, 341
Minnesota Twins, 499
Minolta, 576
Mint.com, 121, 479
Mintel, 219
MinuteClinic, 370
Minute Maid, 306
Mission Pie, 548
Mist Stick, 609
MIT, 112, 270
Mitsui & Co. Ltd, 194
Mitsukoshi, 448
Mittal, 600
Mizuho Investors Securities, 35
ML Direct, 301
M&M, 15
MMode mobile phones, 120

M&M World, 524
Moeller, 192
Moen ProjectNet, 47
Moët et Chandon, 295
Molson Coors Brewing, 130
Mondavi Reserve, 340
Monsanto, 609
Monster.com, 356, 540, 603
Montblanc, 330
Montgomery Ward, 452
Mop & Glo, 250
Morgan Stanley, 601
Motel 6, 326, 509–10
Moterus, 13
Mothers Against Drunk Drivers
(MADD), 79
Motorola, 106, 200, 250, 344,
477, 555, 595, 600, 618,
628, 636
Motrin, 549
Mott’s, 328
Mountain Dew, 221, 251, 260,
280, 551
Movado, 434
Mozilla Firefox, 293–94
Mr. Clean, 270
Mr. Clean Magic Eraser, 574
Mrs. Dash, 551
MSN, 31
MSNBC.com, 130
MTN, 601
MTV, 157, 221, 225, 243,
565, 596
Museum of Contemporary
Art, 500
Museum of Modern Art,
333, 500
Mustang, Ford, 615
My Little Pony, 342, 343
MySimon.com, 384
MySpace, 41, 42, 137, 384, 541,
546, 548, 563
MySpace Video, 549
Nabisco, 145, 176, 345
Nano, 248
Narayana Hrudayalaya
Hospital, 76
Narus and Anderson, 463
NASCAR, 531, 533
NASCAR Busch Series, 525
Nathan’s, 459
National Amateur Dodgeball
Association, 220
National Cash Register
Company, 609
National Dairy Board, 506
National Fluid Milk Processor
Education Program, 506
National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, 638
Nature Company, 227
Nature Valley, 261
Nautilus Group, 418
Navigator, 93

Navistar, 184
NBA, 443, 484, 565
NBC, 44, 476, 514, 578
NBC Universal, 44, 210
NCAA, 543, 565
NEC, 39, 167, 336
NEC Display Solutions, 22, 24
Neiman Marcus, 451, 452, 637
NESCAFÉ, 282, 283
Nestlé, 76, 409, 464, 567, 598,
599, 628, 631, 632
Nestlé Brazil, 600
Nestlé Crunch, 106
Nestlé SA, 316
Net1, 601
Net-a-Porter, 448
NetApp, 186–87
Netflix, 48, 235, 364, 415, 424
NetJets, 278, 370
Netscape, 93, 312
NeuroFocus, 108
New Balance, 630
New Coke, 242, 532
New England Patriots, 533
Newman’s Own, 634
News Corp., 41–42
Newsweek, 412, 516
Newton, 312
New York Post, 42
New York Stock
Exchange, 599
New York Times, 238, 288
New York Yankees, 57, 73
New Zealand Yellow Pages
Group, 537, 538
Nextel, 369
Nextel Cup, 524
NFL, 533
Nickelodeon, 236
Nielsen Claritas, 72, 215
Nielsen Company, 99
Nielsen Media Research, 90
Nielsen Online, 542
Nike, 29–30, 37, 83, 119, 127,
214, 241, 248, 250, 280,
285, 286, 416, 425, 484,
486, 514, 518, 568, 590,
596, 635–36, 639
Nike+ (Plus), 30
Nike Air Force 1, 341–42
Nike Golf, 29
Nikon, 287
Nintendo, 5, 46, 567
Nippon Steel, 627
Nissan, 614, 617
Nissan’s Infiniti, 340
NIVEA, 258, 280, 527
Nokia, 10, 37, 51, 107, 130, 257,
332, 576, 595, 599, 609,
614, 615, 618, 628, 633
Nokia Music Store, 618
No Name line, 460
Nordstrom, 37, 78, 130, 136,
147–48, 218, 243, 263, 401,
434, 441, 452, 637

Nordstrom Rack, 148
North American Industry
Classification System
(NAICS), 88–89
Northern Commercial Company,
147–48
Northwest Airlines, 131
Northwestern Mutual
Life, 290
Northwestern University,
46, 336
Norwich Eaton
Pharmaceuticals, 269
Novartis, 143, 460
Noxell, 269
Noxzema, 269
NTN Entertainment Network, 312
NTT (Nippon Telephone and
Telegraph), 441
Nucor, 11
Nuit perfume, 267
Nuprin, 316
Oakley, 221, 243
Ocean Spray, 475
Odwalla, 621
Office Depot, 24, 124, 197, 302
OfficeMax, 4
Ogilvy, 496
OgilvyAction, 495
Ogilvy Healthworld, 495
Ogilvy & Mather, 296, 493, 495
OgilvyOne, 495
Ogilvy Public Relations
Worldwide, 495
Oil of Olay, 269, 337, 440
Olay Definity, 504
Olay Professional Pro-X’s
Intensive Wrinkle Protocol,
320
Old El Paso, 261
Old Milwaukee, 259
Old Navy, 319, 340
Oldsmobile, 258
Old Spice, 260, 270, 503,
524, 533
Old Spice High Endurance, 260
Olive Garden, 251
Olympics, 531
Olympus, 287
1-800-FLOWERS, 449
1SYNC, 197
One for One program, 637
OneSight, 636
One Stop, 149
OnStar, 504
OPEN: The Small Business
Network, 296
Oracle, 183, 331, 341, 384, 418,
435, 559
Oral-B, 173, 270
Orbitz, 17
Oreo, 523, 631
Oreo Double Stuf Racing
League, 522, 523

Organization for Economic
Cooperation &
Development (OECD), 600
Original Recipe fried
chicken, 604
Origins, 233
Orville Redenbacher popcorn,
72, 101
Osborne, 312
Otis Elevator, 262, 377, 596
Otis Remote Elevator
Monitoring, 47
O2, 139, 291
Out, 191
Outback, Subaru, 342
Oxford University, 292
Oxygen, 217
Pabst Blue Ribbon, 259, 260
Pabst Brewing Company,
259–60
PACCAR Inc., 399
PAETEC, 137–38
Palm, 546
Palm V PDA, 119
Pampers, 216, 269, 303, 337,
342, 400, 440, 551
Pampers Rash Guard, 270
Panasonic, 70
Panasonic Toughbook, 250
Panda Express, 365
Panera Bread, 448
Pangea Organics, 387
Pantene, 137, 269, 270
Papa John’s, 543
Paramount Pictures, 40, 47
Paranormal Activity (movie), 171
Parker Brothers, 312
Parker Hannifin, 396–97
The Partners, 495
Passion of the Christ, The, 546
Patagonia, 15, 24, 434, 621,
629, 630
Patrón, 334
Paul Mitchell, 220, 334
Paul Stuart, 260
Payless Shoes, 459
PayPal, 411
PCWorld, 593
Ped Egg foot files, 264
Pegasus Sports International,
60–64
Pentium, 58
PepsiCo, 39, 101, 119, 225,
277, 302, 305, 306, 307,
348, 404, 464, 498, 535,
598, 611
Pepsi-Cola, 242
Pepto-Bismol, 269
Perdue, 276, 328, 609
Perrier, 316
Persil, 342
Pert Plus, 270
PETCO, 138, 216, 452, 459, 633
Petco.com, 277

Peterbilt, 399
Peter Pan, 178
Petronas of Malaysia, 599
Pets.com, 570
Petsmart.com, 277
Pfizer, 84, 194, 290, 402
P&G. See Procter & Gamble
(P&G)
PG&E, 633
Phaeton, 234
Philip Morris Company, 130,
304, 632–33
Philips, 51, 390, 416–17,
479–80, 608, 610
Philips Carousel, 480
Phineas Cole, 260
Phoenix, 157
Pier 1 Imports, 180
Pierre Cardin, 334
Pierre hotel, 595
Pinocchio, 178
Pioneer Hi-Bred Seeds, 145
Pixi, 499
Pizza Hut, 236, 344, 368, 450
Pizza Inn, 435
PlanetFeedback.com, 73, 362
Plastics.com, 196
Playboy, 21, 565
Playskool, 548
Playskool Preschool
Playgroup, 548
PlayStation 2, 576
Plexco International AG, 201
PNC bank, 219
Poise, 487
Pokémon, 74
Polaroid, 258
Pollo Campero, 595–96
Polo Ralph Lauren, 636
POM Wonderful, 241
PopSugar, 547
Pop-Tarts, Kellogg, 610
Population Communication
Services, 638
Porsche, 50, 234, 516, 596
Porsche 911, 330
Porsche Rennlist (online discussion group), 253
Pottery Barn, 450
Powerade, 438
PowerBar, 277
Power Pro Dustbuster Plus, 340
PPG industries, 184
Prada, 119, 156, 280, 334, 595
Pratt & Whitney, 34–35, 262
Praxair, 567
Premium hams, 261
President’s Choice, 460
Pria, 277
Price Chopper, 98
PriceCostco, 438
PriceGrabber.com, 135
Priceline.com, 384, 486, 487
PriceSCAN.com, 384
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 323

Pringles, 137, 173, 270, 342,
484–85
Prius, 5, 352, 623
Private Label Manufacturers’
Association, 459
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 34, 37,
46, 47, 83, 116, 119, 120,
137, 156, 163, 164, 218,
223, 234, 260, 269–70, 292,
303, 315, 319, 320, 328,
336, 342, 400, 432, 436,
440, 461, 464, 504, 516,
533, 550, 555, 557, 569,
574–75, 576, 585, 599, 610,
626, 628, 629, 631, 634
(PRODUCT) RED™, 233,
636, 649
Proenza Schouler, 452
Profile, GE, 319, 340, 524
Progressive Insurance, 37,
289–90, 630
Progresso, 67, 261
Progresso Light, 263
Promotional Marketing
Association, 522
Pro Plan, 340
Pro Staff Classic tennis
shoes, 253
Pro Strength, 260
Prudential, 336, 557
Prudential Financial, 130, 250
PRWeek, 529
Publix, 130, 464
Puffs, 337
Pulte Homes, 129
Purina Dog Chow, 340
Purina Dog Food, 340
Purina ONE, 340
Q5, 525
Q7, 525
Quaker Chemical, 199
Quaker Nutrition for
Women, 154
Quaker Oats, 145, 256, 306, 609
Quattro, 265
QuickBooks, 120, 121, 547
QuickBooks Live Community,
546, 547
Quick Care, 370
Quicken, 120, 121
Quilts for Kids, 629
QVC, 449
Qwest, 144
Radio Mercury Awards, 510
Rainier, 259
Raisin Bran, Kellogg, 261
Ralcorp Holdings, 307
Raleigh Bicycles, 539
Ralph Lauren, 334, 619
Ralston Purina, 145, 567
Ramada Inn, 433, 604
RateItAll.com, 73
RAZR, Motorola, 250
Index

I11

RCA, 322
Reach in Motion (RIM), 601
Real Madrid, 552
Reckitt Benckiser, 45, 163
Redbox, 47, 415
Red Bull, 220, 243, 498–99,
546, 603
Red Bull Energy Drink, 498
Red Envelope, 421
RediClinic, 370
Redken, 619
Red Robin, 319
Red Zone, 260
REI, 214, 309, 417, 457, 630
R8 Spyder, 525
Reliance, 600
Renault, 617
Renault Logan, 617
Research in Motion, 45,
592–93
Reserve Brands, 316
Restoration Hardware, 451
Revlon, 7, 436, 490, 585, 636
Reynolds, 304, 312
Rhône-Poulenc S.A., 44
Rice Krispies, Kellogg, 261
Richardson-Vicks, 269
Rio Tinto, 194, 195
Ritchie Bros. Auctioneers,
196–97
Ritz, 327
The Ritz-Carlton, 379–80
Ritz-Carlton Boston, 379
Ritz-Carlton hotels, 37, 326, 595
Road Runner Sports, 332, 405
Robert Mondavi Winery, 340
Roberto Cavalli vodka, 334
Rockwell, 207
Rockwell Automation, 199
Rohm & Haas, 574
ROKR, Motorola, 250
Rolex, 307
Rolling Stone, 157, 565
Rolling Stones, 6, 244
Rolls-Royce PLC, 330
Ronald McDonald Care
Mobile, 271
Ronald McDonald Family
Room, 271
Ronald McDonald Houses,
271, 636
Roper Starch Worldwide, 487
Ross Stores, 455
Royal Ahold’s Albert Heijn, 395
Royal Bank of Canada, 20
Royal Bank of Scotland,
149, 301
Royal Caribbean, 144
Royal Dutch/Shell Group,
39, 45
Royal Mail Group plc, 402
Royal Philips Electronics of the
Netherlands, 289, 339,
416–17
RTC Relationship Marketing, 495
I12

Index

Rubbermaid, 125
Ruelala, 386
Ryanair, 300, 301, 385
Ryder System, 203
Saatchi & Saatchi, 291
SABMiller, 601, 628
Safari, 94
Safeguard, 337
Safeway, 72, 197, 449, 468,
553, 636
Safexpress, 165
Sainsbury, 148, 300, 318, 459
Saks Fifth Avenue, 387, 424,
434, 451, 455, 636
Salesforce.com, 370, 576
Salon Selective shampoos, 316
Sam’s Club, 468, 629
Samsonite, 539
Samsung, 12, 37, 46, 50, 127,
314, 321–22, 332,
568, 618
SanDisk, 241
Sandoz, 460
Sanofi-Aventis S.A., 44, 460
SAP, 280, 377, 418
Sara Lee Corporation, 224,
304, 557
SAS, 189–90, 555
SAS Snowflake, 301
Saudi Basic Industries
Corporation (SABIC), 11
Savers, 173
Schematic, 495
Schering-Plough, 44
Schick, 409
Schlitz, 259
Schneider National, 369–70
Scion, 352, 401
S.C. Johnson, 610
Scope, 585
Scotchgard fabrics, 345
Scotch Tape, 250
Scott Paper, 569
Scout Labs, 73
Sears, 44, 146, 197, 218, 224,
323, 341, 364, 378, 409,
425, 436, 441, 452, 604
Seat, 342
Secret Flawless, 568
Segway Human Transporter, 313
Seinfeld, 578
Select Comfort, 289
Sempra Energy, 130
Sensor, 263, 532
Sensor Excel, 400
Servus Credit Union, 115–16
Sesame Street, 510
7-Eleven, 425, 441, 449,
450, 553
7-Up, 516
764 High Speed Dozer, 487
Seventh Generation, 82, 621
Sharper Image, 227
Shaun White 4 Target, 243

Shaun White Snowboarding
(video game), 243
ShelfVision TV, 519
Shell Oil, 187, 427, 595
Sheraton, 78, 262, 370
Sherwin-Williams, 154, 432
ShockHound.com, 154
Shoebox Greetings,
Hallmark, 233
Shop.com, 138
Shopping.com, 135, 412
Showtime, 225
Shulton’s Old Spice, 269
Siemens, 183
Siemens Electrical Apparatus
Division, 231
Siemens Medical Solutions
USA, 6–7
Sienna, 615
Sierra Club, 80, 633
Signature by Levi Strauss
& Co., 218
Sigrid Olsen, 41
Sikorsky, 262
Silk, 551
Silly Bandz, 527
Sinceramente Hallmark, 233
Singapore Airlines, 51, 243,
290, 361
Sirna Therapeutics, 44
SkateTours, 60
Skoda, 342, 606
SKY360, 524
Sky Italia, 42
Skype, 277
Skype Internet, 384, 411–12
SkySport TV, 552
Sleep Number beds, 289
Small Business Administration’s
Office of Advocacy, 191
Smarter Planet, 493
SMARTFOOD, 293
Smart Grid, GE, 483
SMART network, 515
Smirnoff, 310
Smith & Hawken, 634
Smucker’s premium
ketchup, 245
SnackWell, 250
Snap Fitness, 156
Snapple, 305, 629
Snausage Breakfast
Bites, 109
Snickers, 496, 513, 514
Snowshoe Mountain ski resort,
21–22
Snow White and the Seven
Dwarfs (film), 178
SoBe, 305, 553
Société Bic, 267
Sodexho Marriott, 216
SoftSheen-Carson, 619
Soft Sheen Products, 619
Soft White, GE, 174
Sonic Corp., 544

Sonic restaurants, 544
Sony, 12, 35, 36, 37, 38, 46,
57, 241, 261, 287, 302,
313, 321, 322, 340, 390,
468, 524, 568, 576, 614,
618, 631
Sony Ericsson, 551
Sony Style, 457
Sony Vaio, 264
South Africa Airways, 51
Southern Jewelz, 546
Southwest Airlines, 35, 37, 130,
165, 220, 300, 320, 400,
412–13, 543, 630
Southwestern Company of
Nashville (Bibles), 449
Sovereign Bank, 72, 225
Spam, 320
Spanish Stock Market
Latibex, 599
Special K, 486
Spector Freight, 557
Sperry, 313
Spike TV, 217, 565
Splenda, 280, 510
Sporting Goods Manufacturers
Association, 62
Sports Illustrated, 516
Sprint, 277, 369
Sprint Nextel, 369
Sprite, 484
S&S Cycle, 307
Stag umbrellas, 399
Stainmaster®, 345
Stanford University, 30, 33, 57,
82, 120
Staples, 138, 302, 449, 452,
454, 458, 514, 539
Star Alliance, 51
Starbucks, 37, 47, 214, 272,
282, 283, 287, 292, 301,
340, 366, 390, 458, 459,
520, 525, 546, 607, 629,
630, 636, 648–49
Starbucks coffee, 218
Starbucks Foundation, 649
Starbucks VIA Ready Brew
coffee, 219
Starch, 518
Star Wars (movie), 113–14
Starwood Hotels & Resorts
Worldwide, 78, 262–63, 370
State Farm, 164, 223, 485, 486
Steelcase, 101
Stella McCartney, 448
Stihl, 425
St. Jude Medical, 39
St. Louis Cardinals, 506
Stonyfield Farms, 12, 24, 82,
525, 621, 630, 631
Stop & Shop, 465
Stouffer’s, 264, 567
Strattera, 570
StriVectin, 254
Stroh’s, 259

StubHub, 73, 74, 412
Suave, 306
Subaru, 479
Sub Pop Records, 51
Subway, 165, 283, 430, 450
Sub-Zero, 218, 314, 334, 335
Sudler & Hennessey, 495
Sun, The (UK), 42
Sun Chips, Frito-Lay, 348
Sunday Night Football, 516
Sunkist, 348
Sun Microsystems, 183, 306
Sunny Delight, 461
Sun Ovens International, 81
Sunsilk, 112
Suntory, 603
Super Bowl, 503, 506, 516,
531, 535
Supercuts, 450
SUPERVALU, 197
Supply Chain Solutions, 46
Surfer, 253
Surfing, 253
Survey Research Center,
University of Michigan, 91
Susan G. Komen Race for the
Cure, Hallmark, 233
Sweet’N Low, 280, 510
Swiffer Sweeper, 119, 270,
574, 575
Swift and Company, 261, 609
Symantec, 377
TABASCO, 15
Taco Bell, 316, 344, 345
TAG Heuer, 422
Taj luxury hotels, 595
Takashimaya, 448
Taligent, 344
Tang, 610
Target, 12, 37, 95, 136, 180,
197, 218, 243, 275, 300,
370, 400, 401, 423, 443,
452, 456, 464, 499–500
Target Take Charge of
Education, 637
Tasteeos, 307
Tata Consultancy
Services, 595
Tata Group, 595
Tata Nano, 595
Tata of India, 248, 599, 600
Tata Sky, 42
Tata Steel, 328
Tazo Tea Company, 301
TCL, 601
Technorati, 576
Teflon®, 345
Telefonica, 291
Telefónica CTC, 12
Telefutura, 224
Telemundo, 224
Telepizza, 307, 308
Tellabs, 202
Tempur-Pedic, 163

TerraCycle, 11–12
Tesco, 6, 37, 144, 148–49, 300,
417, 430, 431, 452, 459,
613, 634
Tesco Bank, 149
Tesco Broadband, 149
Tesco Express, 149
Tesco Extra, 149
Tesco Home Phone, 149
Tesco Homeplus, 149
Tesco Metro, 149
Tesco Mobile, 149
Tesco Superstores, 149
Test Drive Unlimited, 516
Tetley Tea, 595
Teva, 460
Texas Instruments (TI),
50, 389
Thermo Scientific, 539
ThinkPad, 323
Thomas Cook, 209
Thompson Water Seal, 484
Thomson Reuters, 192
Thorn-EMI, 650
3Com, 612
3M Company, 115, 131, 243,
305, 326, 572, 574,
631, 643
365 Everyday Value, 453
Ticketmaster, 402
Tide, 163, 222, 269, 270, 303,
328, 337, 342, 400, 440
Tide Total Care, 163, 219, 568
Tiffany & Co., 334, 383, 384,
424, 612, 639
Timberland, 24, 48, 291, 525,
621, 630
Time, 516
Time-Life, 420
Times, The, 565
Times Square, 509, 524
Timex, 424, 443
Timken, 191
Tire Rack, 308
Titleist, 613
TiVo, 119, 590
TJ Maxx, 449, 455
TLC, 259
T-Mobile, 319, 506, 507
TNS, 82, 495
TNT, 633
Today Show, The, 74, 528
Tommy Hilfiger, 438
Tom Petty & the
Heartbreakers, 254
Tom’s of Maine, 82, 234, 525
TOMS shoes, 637–38
Tony Hawk, 452
Tony Lama, 306
Topshop, 431, 447
Topshop Express, 431
Topshop-to-Go, 431
TopSource, 197
Toronto Blue Jays, 57
Torrid, 454

Toshiba, 22, 46, 167, 595
Touchstone Pictures,
178, 265
Touchstone Television, 178
Tour de France, 29
Tower Records, 81
Toyota, 5, 37, 83, 224, 244, 257,
260, 291, 302, 352–53, 401,
422, 423, 485, 516, 524,
528, 576, 596, 607, 614,
615, 623, 630
Toyota Production System, 47
Toys “R” Us, 452
Trac II, 263, 532
Trader Joe’s, 214, 456, 630
Trading Process Network
(TPN), 197
Transformers, 342
Transport Canada, 227
Travelers Cheque, 296
Travelocity, 17, 51, 370, 543
TreeHugger, 547, 548
Tree of Life, Hallmark, 233
Tremor, 550
TrèsSugar, 547
Trinitron TV, 614
TripAdvisor, 13
Trivial Pursuit, 312
Trix, 344
Tropicana, 98, 306, 348
Tropicana Pure, 551
True Value, 309
Tundra, 352, 524
Tupperware, 449, 553, 598
TurboTax, 120, 121, 129, 546
TV Guide, 42
Tween Brands, 454
20th Century Fox, 42
24/7 Real Media, 495
Twitter, 3, 4, 58, 115, 121, 186,
248, 270, 520, 546, 548,
565, 631
Tyco, 639
Tylenol, 316, 528, 543
Ubisoft, 243
UBS, 297
UCLA, 108
UK Tri-Nations rugby
tournament, 533
Ultra Dry Pampers, 340
Umbro, 29
Under Armour, 241, 299
UNICEF, 634, 635
UNICEF, Hallmark cards, 233
Unilever, 112, 260, 278, 342,
564–65, 598, 599,
600, 639
Union Pacific Railroad, 40
UNIQLO, 453
Unisys, 186
United Airlines, 51, 130,
359, 362
United Auto Workers, 351
United Network, 495

United’s Shuttle, 301
U.S. Army, 216
U.S. Census Bureau, 72, 88,
183, 224, 366
U.S. Customs and Border
Protection, 612
U.S. Department of
Commerce, 612
U.S. Department of Commerce’s
International Trade
Administration, 604
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 638
U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, 634
U.S. Marine Corps, 292
U.S. Open of Surfing, 220
U.S. Post Office, 48, 90, 366
U.S. Small Business
Administration, 604
U.S. Time Company, 424
United Technologies, 261–62
United Way, 638
United Way of Massachusetts
Bay and Merrimack
Valley, 543
Universal Pictures, 44
Universal Studios, 44, 540
Universal Television Group, 44
University of Chicago, 176, 177
University of Maryland, 299
University of Michigan, 130
University of North Carolina, 461
University of Virginia, 114
University of Wisconsin, 292
Univision, 77, 223, 224
UPS, 46, 99, 292, 303, 304, 359,
418, 630, 631
Urban Outfitters, 431, 454
USAA, 129, 141, 142, 297, 366,
369, 370–71
US Airways, 366, 477
USA Network, 44
USB, 568
U.S. News & World Report, 380
U.S. Steel, 11
US West, 57
UTC, 377
UTC Fire & Security
systems, 262
U2, 243, 636
VAALCO Energy, 308
Valentino, 261
Vanguard Petroleum Corp.,
197, 369
Vanity Fair, 458
Venus, 98
Venus Embrace, Gillette, 568
Vera Wang, 452
Verizon, 223, 305, 420
Verizon Wireless, 43, 127,
130, 277
V Guide, 551
Vicks, 269
Index

I13

Victoria’s Secret, 217–18, 390,
407, 454
Vidal Sassoon, 270
Vigoro fertilizer, 261
Viiv, 58
Viking, 218, 314, 390
Virgin America, 114, 245
Virgin Atlantic, 650
Virgin Aviation, 651
Virgin Cola, 650
Virgin Cosmetics, 650
Virgin Entertainment
Interactive, 312
Virgin Green Fund, 651
Virgin Group, 37, 47, 557,
650–51
Virgin Megastore, 149, 650
Virgin Money, 651
Virgin Pulse, 650
Virgin Records, 650
Virgin Unite, 650
Virgin Vodka, 650
Visa, 51, 280, 281–82, 296, 297,
299, 488, 516, 525
Vista, 93
Vistaprint, 200
Vitaminwater, 293
Vivendi Universal
Entertainment, 44
VML, 495
Vocalpoint, 550
Vodafone Group,
52–53, 385
Vogue, 458, 516
Volcom, 293
Volkswagen, 50, 234,
259, 342
Volt, Chevy, 332
Volvo, 10, 125, 127, 128,
252, 276
VW, 484, 544, 606
VW Beetle, 331
VW GTI, 544
VW Tiguan, 544
Wachovia, 130
Wakoopa (social networking), 250
Walgreens, 197, 300–301, 449
Walkman, 38, 302
Wall Street Journal, 42, 190
Walmart, 12, 35, 37, 46, 70, 72,
83, 94–95, 127, 136, 149,
197, 218, 232, 270, 296,
300, 320, 340, 366, 370,
401, 423, 432, 436, 449,
452, 453, 456, 464, 471,
499, 515, 551, 555, 613,
627, 629, 632, 639
Walmart TV, 515
Walt Disney Company, The, 15,
37, 43, 44, 46, 51
Walt Disney Corp., 83
Walt Disney Productions, 178
Walt Disney Studios, 179
Walt Disney World, 178
I14

Index

Walt Disney World’s Magic
Kingdom, 6
Warnaco, 120
Warner Bros., 47
Warner Music Group, 51
Washington Mutual Occasio, 46
Washington Post, 82
Waste Management
Corporation, 421
Waterford, 444
Wave, 31
Weather Channel, The, 72
Weekly Standard, 42
Wegmans Food Markets, 197,
291, 630
Weight Watchers, 264, 552
Wells Fargo, 71, 103, 225,
360, 458
Wells Fargo Home
Mortgage, 49
Wendy’s, 216
WESCO International, 539
Westat, 99
Westinghouse, 572
Westin Hotels, 78, 263, 345
Westin Stamford, 280
Westport Innovations, 80
WE television, 217
Wharton, 35, 116
Wharton Americus Reed, 102
Wheaties, 15, 67, 261
Whirlpool, 98, 218, 333
Whole Foods, 12, 37, 83, 138,
140, 248, 316, 453, 621,
630, 637
Whole Kitchen, 453
Whole Market, 453
Whopper, 541
W hotels, 78, 263
Wieden+Kennedy, 503
Wii, 5, 567
Wikipedia, 13, 575
William Wrigley Jr.
Company, 418
Wilson, 253
Windows, 93, 94
Windows 95, 93
Windows 98, 93
Windows 2000, 93
Windows 7, 598
Windows 3.0, 93
Windows XP, 93
Wine Spectator, 439
Wipro, 600
Wired, 235, 385
W. L. Gore, 568–69
WNYW New York, 42
Wondercurl mascara, 619
Woodbridge, 340
Woolite, 163, 164
Working Assets, 634
World Bank, 600, 601, 638
World Cup, 524, 531, 601
World Health Organization, 638
World Series, 509

World Trade Organization,
597, 601
World Wildlife Foundation
(WWF), 639
WPP, 246, 495
WPP Digital, 495
Wrangler jeans, 485
W.R. Case & Sons Cutlery, 309
W. R. Grace, 72
Wrigley’s, 258
Wunderman, 495
W.W. Grainger, 196, 200, 432,
463–64
Xbox, 93
Xena: Warrior Princess, 254
Xerox, 34, 40, 101, 128, 204,
250, 300, 305, 466, 627
Yahoo!, 13, 31, 32–33, 47, 109,
262, 302, 306, 542
Yahoo! Finance, 138
Yale, 484
Yankelovich, 13–14
Yankelovich Monitor, 74, 77
Yaohan supermarkets, 453
Yelp.com, 135
Yoplait, 168, 261, 344, 394,
627, 636
YoungFreeAlberta.com, 115
Young & Rubicam, 245, 496
YouTube, 3, 4, 13, 14, 137, 186,
202, 319, 541, 549, 551,
575, 631
Y&R, 495
Zales, 453
Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation
Technique (ZMET), 106
Zappos, 241, 248, 367, 447
Zara, 25–26, 430, 431, 447, 455
Zazzle, 329
ZDNet.com, 73
Zest, 337
Zipcar, 356
Zippo Manufacturing, 141,
308–9
Zyrtec, 264

Subject
Accelerating, 622
Accessible segments, 231
Accumulated production,
393–94
Achievers, 226
Acquisition, 268
Actionable segments, 232
Action campaigns, 638
Active information
search, 167
Activity-based cost (ABC),
133, 393
Activity plans, 559
Actual self-concept, 157

Adaptation
brand element, 609
communication, 610
criteria for marketing
channels, 427
dual, 610
global marketing program, 607
global product strategies,
608–9
product, 608–9
Adapted marketing program, 606
Adapter, 307
Add-on spending, 268
Adjustment heuristics, 176
Administered VMS, 432
Adoption, 589
Ad placement policies and
services, 516
Advertising, 478, 490–91
allowance, 521
consumer-generated, 506
definition of, 504
elasticity, 505
frequency, budget decisions
and, 505
informative, 504
objective, 504–5
persuasive, 505
reinforcement, 505
reminder, 505
specialty, 523
vs. sales promotion, 519–20
Advertising budget, 505
advertising elasticity, 505
factors affecting, 505
Advertising campaign,
506–10
development and execution,
507–10
legal and social issues, 510
message generation and
evaluation, 506–7
pretest research techniques,
518
print ads, 507–9
radio ads, 509
television ads, 507
Advertising effectiveness
communication-effect
research, 518
evaluating, 518–19
media selection, 518–19
sales-effect research, 518–19
Advertising options, alternate,
512–16
media, evaluating, 515–16
place advertising, 512–15
Advertising program, 504–19
advertising budget, 505
advertising campaign, 506–10
advertising objective, 504–5
media selection, 510–19
sales promotion, 519
Advocate channels, 487
Affinity customers, 422

African Americans, 77, 224
Age
in demographic segmentation,
216–17
influencing consumer
behavior, 155–56
Agents, 416, 462
Airtruck, 468
Aligning in channel
management, 432
Allocating, 554
Allowance, 521
Alpha testing, 585
Alternatives, evaluation of,
168–70
beliefs and attitudes, 168
expectancy-value model,
169–70
Ambivalent Networkers, 545
Amplified expressiveness, 491
Anchoring heuristics, 176
Ancillary services, 457
Annual-plan control, 641–42
Anticipatory pricing, 408
Antitrust action, 304
APEC, 602
Approvers in buying center, 188
Arbitration, 438
Area market potential, 88–90
market-buildup method,
88–89
multiple-factor index method,
89–90
Area market specialists, 625
Areas of dominant influence
(ADIs), 518
Arm’s-length price, 612
Arranged interviews, 109
Ascending bids, 402
ASEAN, 602
Asian Americans, 76, 224–25
Aspirational groups, 153
Associative network memory
model, 163
Assortment building, 462
Assurance, service quality
and, 372
Atmospheres, 523
Attack strategy
general, 306
specific, 306
Attitude, 530
about products, 229
definition of, 168
of others, as intervening
factor, 170–71
Attribute listing, 577
Auction-type pricing, 401–2
Audience-attention
probability, 516
Audience quality, 516
Audiometers, 107
Augmented product, 326
Automated warehouses, 467
Automatic vending, 449

Availability heuristics, 174–75
Available market, 85
Average costs, 393
Awareness
audience, 511
in consumer-adoption
process, 589
marketing public relations
and, 528
product, change in, 530
set, 167
Baby boomers, 221
Backward flow of activity, 418
Backward invention, 609
Banded pack, 521
Bare bones relationships, 202
Bargaining power of
buyer/seller, threat of, 232
Barter, 404
Barter markets, 197
Basic product, 326
Basic service, 372
Behavioral campaigns, 638
Behavioral decision theory
(BDT), 174–77
decision heuristics, 174–76
framing, 176–77
theory findings, 175
Behavioral economics, 174–77
Behavioral research, 103
Behavioral segmentation,
227–29
breakdown, 229
decision roles, 227–28
needs and benefits, 227
user and usage, 228–29
Behavioral targeting, 146
Beliefs, 168
Believability, 580
Believers, 227
Benchmarks, 34, 199, 622
Benefits
in behavioral segmentation,
227
in cause-related marketing,
635–36
sales force compensation, 556
Best practices of top service
companies, 366–68
customer complaints,
satisfying, 368
high standards, 366
monitoring systems, 367–68
profittiers, 366–67
strategic concept, 366
top-management
commitment, 366
Beta testing, 585
Billboards, 512–13
Biogenic needs, 160
Blogs, 72–73, 138–39, 205,
547–48
Blue-ocean thinking, 278–79
Bonding, 204

Born global, 598
Bottom-up grassroots approach
to marketing, 137
Brain science, 108
Brainstorming session, 577
Branches of
manufacturers/retailers, 462
Brand
architecture (See Branding
strategy)
associations, 164
attitude, 483
audit, 256
awareness, 482
bonding, 247, 253
building, 27
bundling, 344–45
communities, 253–55, 293
concept, 580
consumption, expanding,
301–2
contact, 251–52, 478
crisis, managing, 316
definition of, 10, 241
experience, dimensions of,
358
feelings, 249
games with, 516
ghost, 316
imagery, 248
journalism, 292
judgments, 249
knowledge, 244
line, 261
loyalty, in small businesses,
293
loyalty status, 228–29
luxury, 334–35
mantras, 284–85, 286
metrics pathway, 117
mix, 261
most valuable, 257
narratives, 292
offerings, fine-tuning, 320
orphan, 316
performance, 247, 248
personality, 157
personification, 107
pillar pattern, 245
private label, 459
purchase intention, 483
reinforcement, 258–59
revitalization, 259–60
role of, 242–43
salience, 248
state of, 248
stature, 245
story, 292
valuation, 256–58
value calculation, 254, 257
value chain, 255–56
value creation, 254, 255
See also Branding
Brand-asset management team
(BAMT), 626

BrandAsset® Valuator (BAV)
model, 245–46, 248
Brand development index (BDI),
89–90
Brand-dominant hierarchy, 168
BrandDynamics pyramid,
246, 247
Branded variants, 261
Brand elements, 250–51
adaptation, 609
criteria for, 250
developing, 250–51
in small businesses, 293
Brand equity, 241–68
customer-based, 244
customer equity and, 267–68
defining, 243–45
drivers, 249–50
holistic marketing, 251–52
measuring, 255–58
models, 245–49
Brand equity, building, 249–55
brand communities, 253–55
brand elements, choosing,
250–51
holistic marketing activities,
designing, 251–52
internal branding, 253
secondary associations,
leveraging, 252–53
value creation practices, 254
Brand equity, managing, 258–60
brand reinforcement, 258–59
brand revitalization, 259–60
Brand extensions, 260,
263–67
advantages of, 264–65
disadvantages of, 265
research insights on, 266–67
scorecard, 266
success characteristics,
265–67
Branding
cause, tips for, 637
co-branding, 344–45
color wheel of, 347
cultural, 292
decisions, 261
definition of, 243
emotional, 290–91
global, ten commandments
of, 608
ingredient, 345–46
narrative, 292
primal, 292
role of, in brand valuation, 257
twenty-first-century, 267
See also Brand
Branding strategy, 260–67
alternative, 261
brand extensions, 263–67
brand portfolios, 262–63
definition of, 260
house of brands vs. branded
house, 261
Index

I15

Brand-management organization, 625–27
Brand portfolios, 262–63
cash cows, 263
flankers, 263
high-end prestige, 263
low-end entry level, 263
Brand positioning, 275–97
alternative approaches, 291
developing, 275–86
differentiation strategies,
289–92
establishing, 286–89
for small businesses, 293–94
Brand positioning, differentiation
strategies, 289–92
alternative approaches, 291
emotional branding,
290–91
means of, 290
Brand-positioning map, 580
Brand resonance, 249
model, 246, 248–49
Brand strength, 244, 245, 257
in small businesses, 293
Brand-tracking studies, 256
BrandZ model, 246
Brazil’s developing market,
598, 600
Break-even chart, 398, 427
BRIC, 598
See also Developing markets
Brick-and-click companies, 439,
440–41
Bridges, 551
Broadcast ads, 518
Broadening, 622
Brokers, 462
Budget allocations in economic
downturn, 319
Budget trade-offs, communication, 490
Building in channel
management, 432
Bulk breaking, 462
Business
advisory services, 328
database, 143
definitions, product to market,
39, 40
innovation, dimensions of,
46–47 (See also Marketing
innovation)
legislation, increase in, 84
mission, 48
partner relationships, 202
sector, 356
services, 328
Business analysis in newproduct development, 583
cash flow statement, 584
costs and profits,
estimating, 584
total sales, estimating,
583–83
I16

Index

Business-goods testing,
587–88
Business markets
analyzing, 183–211
business-to-business
customer relationships,
201–5
challenges faced by, 184
definition of, 9, 183
government markets, 205–7
institutional markets, 205–6
organizational buying, 183–88
participants in business
buying process, 188–93
purchasing/procurement
process, 193–95
stages (buyphases) in buying
process, 195–201
vs. consumer markets,
183–85
Business promotion, 519
tools, 522
Business-to-business customer
relationships, 201–5
new technology and, 204–5
risks and opportunism in,
203–4
vertical coordination, benefits
of, 202–3
Business-to-business
e-commerce, 439–40
Business unit strategic planning,
47–54
business mission in, 48
control in, 53–54
feedback in, 53–54
goal formulation in, 50
program formulation in, 53
program implementation in, 53
strategic formulation in, 50–53
SWOT analysis in, 48–50
Buyback arrangement, 404
Buyer
in buying center, 188
decision roles, 227
fewer, 184
geographically concentrated,
185
intentions, survey of, 91
larger, 184
reaching hard-to-find, 491
turnover, 517
Buyer-readiness stage, 228, 493
Buyer-supplier relationships,
202–3
Buygrid framework, 195
Buying, 462
alliances, 197
forward, 522
service, 449
sites, 197
Buying center, 188–90
influences, 189–90
members and roles in,
188–89

Buying decision process,
166–74
See also Five-stage model
Buying influences
key, 193
multiple, 185
Buying process, stages in,
195–201
buygrid framework, 195
general need description, 196
order-routine specification, 201
performance review, 201
problem recognition, 196
product specification, 196
proposal solicitation, 198
supplier search, 196–98
supplier selection, 198–201
Buying situations, 185–87
modified rebuy, 186
new task, 186
straight rebuy, 185
Buyphases in buying process.
See Buying process,
stages in
Buzz marketing, 220, 293–94,
549–51, 552
Bypass attack, 306
By-product pricing, 343–44
Call centers, 368, 369
Call reports, 559
Cannabilization, 438
Cannibalized income, 584
Capital items, 328
Captive-product pricing, 343
Cash cows, 263
Cash-flow metrics
pathway, 117
Cash flow statement, 584
Cash rebates, 405
Cash refund offers, 521
Catalog marketing, 539
Catalog showroom, 449
Catalog sites, 196
Category concept, 579
Category extension, 261
Category management, 626
Category membership
communicating, 288
definition of, 277
in establishing brand
positioning, 286, 287–88
Category need, 482
Category points-of-parity,
280–81
Causal marketing
research, 100
Cause branding, tips for, 637
Cause program
classic, 634
designing, 636, 637
Cause-related marketing,
634–38
benefits and costs, 635–36
cause branding, tips for, 637

cause program, designing,
636, 637
classic cause marketing programs, 634
Millenials’ attitudes about,
635
Celebrity endorsements, 486
Census tracts, 90
Central business districts, 458
Central Contractor Registration
(CCR) database, 207
Central route, 173
Cents-off deals, 521
Chain-ratio method, 88
Channel
captain, 431
coordination, 435
design and arrangements,
modifying, 429
differences in global
distribution, 613
differentiation, 290
entry in global distribution,
613
evolution, 429
in foreign nations, 613
functions and flows, 418–19
levels, 420–21
modification decisions,
429–30
partnerships, 428
power, 428
pricing, 406
specialist, 309
stewards/stewardships,
431–32
Channel alternatives, 424–27
channel members, terms and
responsibilities of, 426
corporate and adaptive
criteria, 427
economic criteria, 426–27
evaluating, 426
identifying, 424–26
numbers of intermediaries,
424–25
types of intermediaries, 424
Channel conflict, 435–38
cannibalization, 438
causes of, 436
definition of, 435
dilution, 438
ethical issues in, 438
legal issues in, 438
managing, 436–38
strategies to manage,
437–38
types of, 435–36
Channel-design decisions,
422–27
channel alternatives, 424–26
customer needs and wants,
analyzing, 422–23
objectives and constraints,
establishing, 423–24

Channel integration and
systems, 417, 431–35
horizontal marketing systems,
433
integrated multichannel
marketing systems, 433–35
vertical marketing systems,
431–33
Channel-management
decisions, 427–31
channel design and arrangements, modifying, 429
channel members, 427–29
channel modification
decisions, 429–30
global channel considerations,
430–31
Channel members
evaluating, 429
functions, 419
selecting, 427
terms and responsibilities
of, 426
training and motivating, 428
Chief executive officer (CEO),
4, 628
Chief financial officer (CFO), 4
Chief information officer
(CIO), 4
Chief marketing officer
(CMO), 4, 17
China’s developing market,
598, 601
Choice architecture, 176
Choice set, 167, 168
City product version, 609
Cliques, 551
Cloner, 307
Closing, 561–62
Clutter, budget decisions
and, 505
Co-branding, 344–45
Coercive power, 428
Cognitive campaigns, 638
Cohorts, 76
See also Generations
Collaborative exchanges, 202
Collectivism, 607
Color wheel of branding and
packaging, 347
Combo sites, 73
Commercial information
sources, 167
Commercialization in newproduct development, 588
how (introductory market
strategy), 588
when (timing), 588
where (geographic strategy),
588
to whom (target-market
prospects), 588
Commoditization, 184
Commonality, 496
Common carrier, 468

Communicability, 580, 590
Communication
adaptation, 610
audit, 479
budget trade-offs, 490
global strategies, 610–11
metrics, 642
modes, 478–79
as retail channel, 458
sales force, 554
Communication channels,
selecting, 486–88
integration of communication
channels, 488
nonpersonal (mass) communication channels, 487–88
personal communications
channels, 486–87
Communication-effect research,
518
Communication objectives
brand attitude, 483
brand awareness, 482
brand purchase intention, 483
category need, 482
determining, 482–83
Communication options in interactive marketing
display ads, 542–43
e-mail, 543
mobile marketing, 543–45
search options, 542
Web sites, 541–42
Communications, designing,
484–86
creative strategy, 484–85
message source, 485–86
message strategy, 484
Community shopping centers,
459
Company brand name, 261
Company capabilities, affecting
marketing, 14–15
Company demand, 87
Company pricing policies, 402–3
Company sales force, 555
Company sales forecast, 87
Company sales potential, 87–88
Compatibility, 590
Compensation deal, 404
Competition
budget decisions, 505
in global markets, 595–96
See also Competitive strategies; Competitors
Competitive advantage, 289
Competitive depositioning, 170
Competitive frame of reference,
275–79
Competitive-parity method, 489
Competitive points-of-parity,
281
Competitive strategies, 299–323
competitive strategies, other,
305–10

competitive strategies for
market leaders, 299–305
in economic downturn, 318
market-challenger strategies,
305–7
market-follower strategies,
307
for market leaders, 299–305
market-nicher strategies,
308–10
product life-cycle marketing
strategies, 310–18
Competitors
analyzing, 279
costs, prices, and offers, 395
definition of, 278
identifying, 277–79
price changes, responding to,
409–10
studying, in new-product
development, 577
threats posed by, 291
Complementarity, 496
Complementary services, 361
Complexity, 590
Component materials and
parts, 328
Compositional approach, 199
Comprehension, 530
Comprehensive audit, 643
Computer games in
marketing, 221
Concentration, new product
advertising and, 517
Concept to strategy in
new-product development,
579–84
business analysis, 583
concept development,
579–80
concept testing, 580–81
conjoint analysis, 581–82
marketing strategy development, 582–83
Conditions of sale, 426
Conformance quality, 131,
329–30
Congruity, 485, 486
Conjoint analysis, 199
Conjunctive heuristic, 170
Connectors, 551
Consideration set, 167
Consumer
base, budget decisions
and, 505
buying power, 13
choice, noncompensatory
models of, 170
cooperative, 450
environmental segments, 82
franchise building, 520
information, 13
involvement, 173–74
participation, 13
psychology, 78

quiz, average U.S., 155
resistance, 13–14
surveys, 523
tests on packaging, 348
Consumer-adoption process,
589–90
characteristics of the
innovation, 590
factors influencing, 589
organizations’ readiness to
adopt innovations, 590
personal influence, 590
readiness to try new products,
589
stages in, 589
time adoption of innovations,
590
Consumer behavior, 151–59
cultural factors, 151–53
influences on, 151–59
model of, 160, 161
personal factors, 155–59
social factors, 153–55
understanding, 166
Consumer decision making,
173–74
low-involvement, 173–74
successive sets involved in,
167–68
variety-seeking buying
behavior, 174
Consumer-direct (CD)
channels, 535
Consumer-generated
advertising, 506
Consumer-goods classification,
327
Consumer-goods market
testing, 586–87
controlled test marketing,
586–87
sales-wave research, 586
simulated test marketing, 586
test markets, 587
Consumerist movement, 84
Consumer-loyalty process, 589
Consumer markets, 9
analyzing, 151–80
behavioral decision theory,
174–77
behavioral economics,
174–77
buying decision process,
166–74 (See also Fivestage model)
consumer behavior, influences
on, 151–59
psychological processes, key,
160–66
vs. business markets,
183–85
Consumer participation,
increased, 361
Consumer promotion, 519
tools, 520, 521
Index

I17

Consumer psychology and
pricing, 386–88
price endings, 388
price-quality inferences, 388
reference prices, 387–88
Consumption
patterns, 68
system, 326
Consumption chain method, 47
Contact methods, 107–10
mail, 108
online, 109–10
personal, 109
telephone, 108–9
Containerization, 468
Contests, 521
Contextual placement, 540
Continuity, new product
advertising and, 517
Continuous replenishment
programs, 201
Contract carrier, 468
Contraction defense, 304
Contract manufacturing, 604
Contracts, management, 604
Contractual sales force, 555
Contractual transaction, 202
Contractual VMS, 433
Contribution, 496
Control, 491
annual-plan control, 641–42
in business unit strategic
planning, 53–54
efficiency control, 641, 642
marketing control, 641
profitability control,
641, 642
strategic, 641, 643–46
Controllable returns, 331
Controlled test marketing,
586–87
Convenience goods, 327
Convenience store, 449
Conventional marketing
system, 431
Conversion rates, 140
Cookies, 70
Cooperative organizations, 603
Cooperative systems, 202
Co-option, 437
Core beliefs, 79
Core benefit, 326
Core business processes, in
value chain, 34
Core competencies, 35–36
Core cultural values, 79
Core principles of mental
accounting, 177
Corporate chain store, 450
Corporate communications, 527
Corporate credibility, 203
Corporate criteria for marketing
channels, 427
Corporate culture, 45
Corporate environmentalism, 81
I18

Index

Corporate expertise, 203
Corporate image, marketing
public relations and, 528
Corporate likability, 203
Corporate retailing, 450
Corporate social
initiatives, 24
Corporate social responsibility,
630–34
ethical behavior, 630
legal behavior, 630
report, 632
social responsibility behavior,
630, 632–33
sustainability, 633–34
Corporate societal marketing
(CSM), 634
Corporate strategic planning,
37–47
growth opportunities,
assessing, 42–47
marketing innovation and,
45–47
mission statements, 38–39
organizational culture and, 45
organization and, 45
strategic business units,
39–42
Corporate trustworthiness, 203
Corporate umbrella, 261
Corporate VMS, 432
Cost
in cause-related marketing,
635–36
inflation, 408
in integrating IMC program,
496
leadership, 51
and profit, estimating, 584
Costs, estimating, 392–95
accumulated production,
393–94
levels of production, 393
target costing, 394
types of costs, 393
Counseling, 463, 527
Counterfeiter, 307
Counterfeit products, 612–13
Counteroffensive defense, 303
Countertrade, 404
Country-of-origin effects,
614–15
building country
images, 614
consumer perceptions of,
614–15
Country product version, 609
Coupons, 521
Coverage, 496
Creative anticipation, 302
Creative brief, 506
Creative strategy, 484–85
informational appeals, 484
transformational appeals,
484–85

Creativity
in marketing research
process, 113
in new-product development,
577–78
Credence qualities, 357
Credibility, 491, 528
Credit, 78
Critical life events or transitions,
156
Critical path scheduling (CPS),
588
Cross-functional teams, 572
Cross-selling, 141
Crowdsourcing, 575
Cues, 163
Cultivation, 492
Cultural branding, 292
Culture
definition of, 151, 153
in demographic segmentation
(See Multicultural marketing)
factors influencing consumer
behavior, 151–53
values, core, 79
Current demand estimations,
88–90
area market potential, 88–90
industry sales, 90
market shares, 90
total market potential, 88
Customer
acquisition process, 34
advantage, 289
attributes (CAs), 585
base, 140
base management, 140–41
channel-design decisions,
422–23
churn, 139–40
cloning, 214
communities, 439
complaints, satisfying, 368
complaint sites, 73
connecting with, 27
consulting, 331
coproduction, 363–64
costs, solutions to reduce,
200
defection, reducing, 139–40
empowerment, 137–38
empowerment of, 362–63
equity, 267–68
expectations of, managing,
373–75
failures, 364
getting closer to, in economic
downturn, 318–19
mailing lists, 143
markets, 9
metrics, 642
metrics pathway, 117
multiplier, 255–56
needs, 376–77, 422–23
profitability, 133

readiness to buy metrics, 642
recommendations, 139
retention dynamics, 140
revenues, solutions to
enhance, 200
reviews, 138–39
risks, solutions to decrease,
200
satisfaction, quality control
and, 360
satisfying employees and,
364–65
supply, 202
surprising, service quality
and, 372
touch point, 135
training, 331
See also Customer service
Customer-based brand
equity, 244
Customer databases, 143–44
use of, 144
vs. customer mailing
lists, 143
Customer-driven
departments, 624
Customer-focused value
proposition, 276
Customerization, 234–35
Customer lifetime value (CLV),
132–34
calculating, 134–35
customer equity, 268
definition of, 134
measuring, 134
profitable customer, 133
Customer loyalty, 141–43
building, 141–43
institutional ties,
creating, 143
interacting with customers,
141–42
loyalty programs,
developing, 142
top brands in, 127
win-backs, 143
Customer-management
organization, 627
Customer-on-top business
model, 124
Customer partnering, 622
Customer-perceived value
(CPV), 124–27
customer value analysis, 126
definition of, 125
high customer value,
delivering, 127
processes and implications,
choice, 126
value concepts, applying,
125–26
Customer-performance
scorecard, 116, 117
Customer profitability analysis
(CPA), 133

Customer relationship in
services, shifting, 362–65
customer coproduction,
363–64
customer empowerment,
362–63
satisfying employees and
customers, 364–65
Customer relationship management (CRM), 135–39
customer empowerment,
137–38
customer equity, 268
customer recommendations,
139
customer reviews, 138–39
definition of, 135
downside of, 145–46
personalizing marketing,
135–37
process, 34
value networks, 418
Customer relationships, 134–43
attracting and retaining
customers, 139–41
capital, 140
customer base management,
140–41
customer-on-top business
model, 124
customer-perceived value,
124–27
customer relationship
management, 135–39
database marketing, 143–46
defection, reducing, 139–40
loyalty, 141–43
quality of product and service,
131–32
retention dynamics, 140
total customer satisfaction,
128–31
Customer satisfaction
follow-up, 562
maintenance, 562
monitoring, 128–31
quality of product and service,
131–32
total, 128
Customer-segment pricing, 406
Customer service
evolution, 377–78
imperative, 378
interface, 375
online, 376
See also Customer
Customer service representatives (CSRs), 368
Customer-size specialist, 309
Customer value, 33–37
analysis, 126
core competencies, 35–36
holistic marketing orientation
and, 36
strategic planning and, 36–37

value chain and, 34–35
value delivery process and,
33–34
vs. company cost, in product
differentiation, 328
Customer value assessment
(CVA), 199
Customer-value hierarchy, 326
Customization, 234–35, 329
Customized marketing, 492
Custom marketing research
firms, 99
Cycle-recycle pattern, 311
Data
interdependence of, 113
sources, 100
Database, 71
business, 143
customer, 143–44
Database marketing, 143–46
behavioral targeting, 146
customer databases, 143
data mining, 144–45
data warehouses, 143–44
downside of, 145–46
examples of, 144
Data mining, 71, 144–45
Data warehouse, 71, 143–44
Deadly sins, 647
Dealer tests on packaging, 348
Debt, 78
Deception, 540
Decider, 188, 227
Decision framing, 176–77
Decision heuristics, 174–76
adjustment heuristics, 176
anchoring heuristics, 176
availability heuristics, 174–75
representativeness
heuristics, 175
Decision making
consumer, 173–74
in marketing research
process, 99–100, 111, 112
in new-product development,
573
roles in behavioral
segmentation, 227–28
Decline stage of product life
cycle, 310, 314–16
Declining demand, 8
Decoding, 480
Deep metaphors, 106
Defensive marketing, 303–4
Delayed quotation pricing, 408
Deliverer, 553
Delivery, 331
Delivery channel, 418
Delivery of services,
unsuccessful, 373
Demand
business markets vs. consumer markets, 185
chain planning, 417

company, 87
creator, 553
curves, estimating, 391–92
declining, 8
derived, 185
estimations, current, 88–90
estimations, future, 90–91
fluctuating, 185
inelastic, 185
landscape, 574
market, 85–91
marketing sensitivity of, 86
primary, 86
states, 8
See also Market demand
Demand, determining, 390–92
estimating demand curves,
391–92
price elasticity of demand,
392
price sensitivity, 390–91
Demand-first innovation and
growth (DIG) framework,
573–74
Demand measurement, 85–86
types of, 85–86
Demand measurement vocabulary, 86–88
company demand, 87
company sales forecast, 87
company sales potential,
87–88
market demand, 86–87
market forecast, 87
market potential, 87
Demand-side method, 526
Demographic environment,
75–77
educational groups, 77
ethnic and other markets,
76–77
household patterns, 77
population age mix, 75, 76
population growth, worldwide,
75
Demographic segmentation,
216–25, 230
age and life-cycle stage,
216–17
gender, 217
generation, 219–22
income, 218
life stage, 217
race and culture, 222–25
Department store, 449
Deregulation, 12
Derived demand, 185
Descending bids, 402
Descriptive marketing research,
100
Design, 332–33
luxury brands, 334–35
thinking, 333
top design companies and
countries, 332–33

Designated marketing areas
(DMAs), 518
Desktop marketing, 641
Desktop Veterans, 545
Developing markets, 598–602
Brazil, 598, 600
China, 598, 601
India, 598, 600
Indonesia, 598, 601
Russia, 598, 600
South Africa, 598, 601
vs. developed markets,
598–602
Development of new products.
See New-product
development
Differentiating services, 368–70
innovation with, 370
primary and secondary
options, 368–70
Differentiation
aggressive price discounter,
300–301
in brand positioning
strategies, 289–92
distribution, 469
marketing, 233
means of, 290
in Porter’s generic
strategies, 51
pricing, 361, 406–7
product, 329–30
segments, 232
services, 330–32
Digital Collaborators, 545
Dilution, 438
Diplomacy, 437
Direct export, 603–4
Direct investment, 605
Direct mail, 538–39
campaign success,
measuring, 539
objectives, 538
offer elements, 538
target markets and
prospects, 538
testing elements, 539
Direct marketing, 449, 478, 492,
535–40
benefits of, 536–37
catalog marketing, 539
channel, 420
direct mail, 538–39
ethical issues in, 539
other media for, 539–40
public issues in, 539
telemarketing, 539
Direct product profitability
(DPP), 456
Direct purchasing, 185
Direct sales force, 555
Direct selling, 449
Direct survey questions, 199
Disabled consumers, 77
Discount store, 449
Index

I19

Discretionary options, 231
Discrimination, 163
Disintermediation, 13
Display ads, 542–43
Display allowance, 521
Disposal, 172–73
Disruptive technologies, 569
Dissatisfiers, 161
Dissociative groups, 153
Distribution metrics, 642
Distribution programming, 432
Distribution strategies,
global, 613
Distribution vehicle, 523
Distribution warehouses, 467
Distributors’ territorial
rights, 426
Diversification growth, 44–45
Diversification strategy, 43
Diverting, 522
Divesting older businesses, 45
Divisibility, 590
Division strategic planning,
37–47
growth opportunities, assessing, 42–47
marketing innovation and,
45–47
mission statements,
38–39
organizational culture
and, 45
organization and, 45
strategic business units,
39–42
“Do-feel-learn” sequence,
480–81
Domestic-based export
agents, 603
department or division, 604
merchants, 603
“Do Not Call” registry, 108
Down-market stretch, 340
Downsizing, 45
Dragalong income, 584
Dramatization, 491
Drifting Surfers, 545
Drive, 163
DROP-error, 578
Drug store, 449
Dual adaptation, 610
Dual branding, 344–45
Dual compensation, 437
Dumping, 612
Durability, 327, 330
Durable goods, 327
Dutch auctions, 402
Dynamic process model of
service quality, 374
Early adopters, 589
Early majority, 589
Earned media, 487, 546
Ease of use, 542
Echo Boomers, 219–21
I20

Index

E-commerce
brick-and-click companies,
439, 440–41
definition of, 438
marketing practices, 438–41
pure-click companies, 439–40
Econometric analysis, 91
Economic environment, 77–78
consumer psychology, 78
credit, 78
debt, 78
income, 78
income distribution, 78
savings, 78
Economics
cost of market share
expansion, 304
criteria for marketing
channels, 426–27
downturn (See Marketing in
economic downturn)
influence on consumption
patterns, 156
Editing in channel
management, 432
Editorial quality, 516
Educational groups, 77
Efficiency control, 641, 642
Efficient consumer response
(ECR) practices, 428
E-hubs, 196
Elaboration likelihood model, 173
Elasticity, advertising, 505
Electroencephalograph
(EEG), 108
Electronic shopping, 449
Elimination-by-aspects
heuristic, 170
E-mail, 543
Emergency goods, 327
Emotional branding, 290–91
Emotions, 163
Empathy, service quality
and, 372
Employee
differentiation, 290
exchange, 437
research, service quality
and, 372
satisfying customers and,
364–65
Empowering, 622
Enablers and integrators, 428
Encirclement attack, 306
Encoding, 480
End-user specialist, 309
Energized differentiation, 245
Engaging events and experiences, 492
Engineering attributes (EAs), 585
Engineering tests on
packaging, 348
English auctions, 402
Enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 418

Enthusiasm, marketing public
relations and, 528
Enthusiast, 227
Environment
consumer environmental
segments, 82
corporate environmentalism,
81
demographic, 75–77
economic, 77–78
macroenvironment analysis,
74–84
of marketing communication,
changing, 476–77
political-legal, 84
pricing, changing, 384–86
protection, 80–81
regulations, 80
of retailing, new, 451–53
sociocultural, 78–80
technological, 81, 83–84
E-procurement, 197–98
Equipment, 328
Equipment-based services, 357
Escalator clauses, 408
E-service quality, assessing, 376
Esteem, 245
Ethical behavior, 630
Ethics
in channel conflicts, 438
in choice of market targets,
235–36
in direct marketing, 539
in marketing, 113
Ethnic markets, 76–77
Ethnographic research, 101
European consumer values,
422–23
European Union, 602
Evaluating sales representatives,
559–60
formal evaluation, 559–60
form for, 560
information sources, 559
Evaluation
of advertising campaign,
506–7
in consumer-adoption
process, 589
Event creation, 525
Event marketing, 5–6
Events and experiences, 524–27
in communications mix,
478, 492
creating experiences,
526–27
events objectives, 524–25
in marketing public
relations, 529
sponsorship decisions,
525–26
Events marketing, 220
Everyday low pricing (EDLP),
400–401, 457
Excess plant capacity, 407

Exchange markets, 197
Exclusive dealing, 425, 438
Exclusive distribution,
424–25, 438
Executive summary, 54
Expansible market, 86
Expansion, facilities for
future, 361
Expectancy-value model,
169–70
Expected product, 326
Expected services, 373
Expense allowances, 556
Experience-curve pricing, 393
Experiencers, 226
Experiences. See Events and
experiences
Experiential information
sources, 167
Experiential marketing, 6
Experimental design in
advertising, 519
Experimental research, 103–4
Experiments, 523
Expert channels, 487
Expertise, 485
Expert opinion, 91
Expert power, 428
Exploratory marketing
research, 100
Exponential smoothing, 91
Export, indirect and direct,
603–4
Export department, 616
Export-management
companies, 603
Exposures, 511, 529–30
Expropriation, 204
Extended warranties, 377
External environment
analysis, 48–49
External marketing, 365
Extranet link to suppliers, 197
Extra-role behaviors, 368
Extreme value store, 449
Extrinsic rewards, 558
FABV approach, 561
Facilitating services, 377
Facilitators, definition of, 416
Facilities for future expansion,
361
Fad, 74
Fad life cycles, 311
Failures
customer, 364
frequency, 376
new-product, 570
Fair play, service quality and, 372
Family brand, 260
Family brand name, 261
Family influencing consumer
behavior, 154
Family life cycle, 155
Family of orientation, 154

Family of procreation, 154
Farm products, 327
Fashion life cycles, 311
Fast & Furious 4 (movie), 44
Feature improvement, 314
Features, 329
Feedback
brand extensions, 264–65
in business unit strategic
planning, 53–54
in communications process,
480
in evaluating sales representatives, 559
sites, 73
Feed-forward, 559
Feminine dimension, 607
Field value-in-use assessment,
199
Financial accountability, 22
Financial analysis, in brand
valuation, 257
Financial projections, 54–55
Financial risk, 171
Financing, 462
Finite nonrenewable resources, 81
Firms of endearment, 630
First entry, 588
First movers, 312
Fishyback, 468
Five-stage model, 166–74
alternatives, evaluation of,
168–70
consumer decision making,
173–74
information search, 167
information sources, 167–68
postpurchase behavior,
172–73
problem recognition, 167
purchase decision, 170–71
Fixed-amount compensation,
556
Fixed costs, 393
Flank defense, 303
Flankers, 263
Flanking attack, 306
Flattening, 622
Flexible market offering, 231
Flighting, new product
advertising and, 517
Flow, in modern exchange
economy, 8
Fluctuating demand, 185
Focus, 51, 622
Focus group
assessment, 199
definition of, 199
research, 101–2
Follow-up, 562
Forced relationships, 577
Forecasting
buyers’ intentions, survey
of, 91
definition of, 91

expert opinion, 91
market-test method, 91
past-sales analysis, 91
sales force opinions,
composite of, 91
Foreign-based distributors or
agents, 604
Form, 329
Forums, 73, 546–47
Forward buying, 522
Forward flow of activity, 418
Forward invention, 609
Four Ps, 25–26
Fragile-market-share trap, 408
Frames of reference
competitive, 275–79
multiple, 282–83
Framing, 176–77
mental accounting, 176–77
in purchasing/procurement
process, 194
Franchisees, 450
Franchise organizations, 433, 450
Franchising, 450, 604
Franchisor, 433, 450
Fraud, 540
Free goods, 521
Free media, 546
Free online services, 384–85
Free samples, 384–85
Free trials, 521
Frequency, media selection and,
511–12
Frequency programs, 521
Freud’s theory, 160
Frontal attack, 306
Fulfillment, online, 376
Fulfillment management
process, 34
Full demand, 8
Full-line forcing, 438
Full market coverage, 232–33
Full-service retailer, 448
Full-service wholesalers, 462
Functional hubs, 197
Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), 108
Functional organization,
623, 625
Functional risk, 171
Future demand estimations,
90–91
See also Forecasting
Gain and risk sharing, 200
pricing, 403
Galvanometers, 107
Games, 521
with brands, 516
Gap level, 580
Gatekeepers in buying
center, 188
Gender in demographic
segmentation, 217
General need description, 196

Generations, 219–22
baby boomers, 221
Gen X, 221
Millenials (Gen Y), 219–21
profiling, 220
Silent Generation, 221–22
Generics, 460
Gen X, 221
Gen Y (Millenials), 219–21, 635
Geographical expansion strategy, 301
Geographical pricing, 404
Geographic organization,
616, 625
Geographic segmentation,
214–16
Geographic specialist, 309
Ghost brands, 316
Giant retailers, 452–53
Gifts, 521
Global channel considerations,
430–31
Global communication
strategies, 610–11
Global distribution
strategies, 613
Global firm, definition of, 596
Global industry, definition
of, 596
Globalization, 12, 622
Global marketing organization,
616–17
export department, 616
global organization, 616–16
international division, 616
Global marketing program,
606–13
blunders in, 610
communication strategies,
610–11
distribution strategies, 613
marketing adaptation, 607
pricing strategies, 611–13
product strategies, 608–10
similarities and differences,
606–7
ten commandments of global
branding, 608
Global markets, 9, 595–619
competing in, 595–96
country-of-origin effects,
614–15
going abroad, deciding on, 597
how to enter market,
deciding, 603–6
marketing organization,
deciding on, 616–17
marketing program, deciding
on, 606–13
markets to enter, deciding
which, 597–603
Global markets, entering,
597–606
deciding on how to enter,
603–6

developed vs. developing
markets, 598–602
direct investment, 605
evaluating potential markets,
602–3
export, indirect and direct,
603–4
globally standardized
marketing pros and
cons, 606
how many to enter, 598
joint ventures, 605
licensing, 604–5
regional trade areas and
agreements, 602
Global organization, 616–16
Global Positioning System
(GPS), 107, 331
Global pricing strategies, 611–13
counterfeit products, 612–13
gray markets, 612
price escalation, 611–12
transfer prices, 612
Global product strategies,
608–10
brand element adaptation, 609
product adaptation strategies,
608–9
product standardization, 608
Goal achievement, strategy for,
50–52
See also Strategic formulation
Goal formulation, 50
Goal incompatibility, 436
Going abroad, deciding on, 597
Going-rate pricing, 401
Goods, 5
See also Product
Government markets, 9, 205–7
Government sector, 356
Grassroots marketing, 214
Gray markets, 612
Green marketing, 80–83
Greenwashing, 633
Gross domestic product
(GDP), 90
Group-discussion method, 91
Growth, long-term, 27
Growth leaders, 572
Growth opportunities
corporate strategic planning,
42–47
diversification growth,
44–45
divesting older businesses, 45
downsizing, 45
integrative growth, 43–44
intensive growth, 43
strategic-planning gap, 42
Growth-slump-maturity
pattern, 310
Growth stage of product life
cycle, 310, 313
Guarantees, 349, 360
Guerrilla attack, 306
Index

I21

Happenings data, 71
Hard-core loyals, 228
Hard-discount store, 449
Hardware of success, 53
Harvesting, 315
Heart share, 291
Hedonic bias, 163
Heightened attention, 167
Heightened competition, 12
Herzberg’s theory, 161
Heterogeneous shopping
goods, 327
Heuristics
consumer choice, 170
decision, 174–76
definition of, 170
Hierarchy-of-effects model, 481
High customer value,
delivering, 127
High-end prestige, 263
Higher-volume retailers, 456
High-level management committee, 572
High-low pricing, 401
High-markup retailers, 456
Hiring procedures, 360
Hispanic Americans, 76–77,
222–24
Historical approach to advertising, 519
Holistic marketing
brand equity, 251–52
orientation in customer
value, 36
Homogenous shopping goods,
327
Horizontal channel conflict,
435–36
Horizontal marketing systems,
433
Household patterns, 77
Hub-and-spoke system, 625
Hybrid channels, 416–17
Hybrid grid, 435
Hybrid offering, 357
Ideal method, 47
Ideal self-concept, 157
Idea manager, 576
Ideas as market offering, 7
Idea screening, 578–79
Ideas in new-product development, 573–79
creativity techniques, adopting, 577–78
idea screening, 578–79
interacting with employees,
576–77
interacting with others,
574–76
studying competitors, 577
Identity media, 529
identity theft, 84
Image differentiation, 290
Image pricing, 406
I22

Index

Image seekers, 227
Imitator, 307
Impact, media selection and,
511–12
Implementation controls, 55
Implication questions, 560
Implications, in customer perceived value, 126
Implicit events and
experiences, 492
Importance-performance analysis, 367–68
Importance ratings, 199
Impulse goods, 327
Inbound telemarketing, 539
Incentive, 491
Income, 78
Income distribution, 78
Income distribution patterns, 78
Income in demographic segmentation, 218
Incremental innovation, 569
Independent audit, 643
India’s developing market,
598, 600
Indirect export, 603–4
Individualism, 607
Individual marketing, 234–35
Indonesia
developing markets, 598, 601
selling to, 188
Industrial economies, 78
Industrial-goods classification,
327–28
Industrializing economies, 78
Industry, definition of, 278
Industry convergence, 12
Industry sales, 90
Inelastic demand, 185
Influencer, 188, 227
Influencing in channel
management, 432
Influential word-of-mouth
marketing, 492
Infomediaries, 171, 439
Infomercials, 539–40
Information
gathering, 554
marketing of, 6–7
search, 167
sources, 167–68
Informational appeals, 484
Information Encumbered, 545
Information in marketing
research process
analyzing, 100
collecting, 110–11
value and cost of, 113
Informative advertising, 504
Ingredient branding, 345–46
In-home tests, 518
Initiator, 188, 227
Innovation
definition of, 589
diffusion process, 589

opportunities, 83
with services, 370
in services differentiation, 290
value, high growth through,
278–79
Innovators, 226, 589
Inseparability, 359
Installations, 328, 331
Institutional markets,
205–6
Institutional ties, creating, 143
Intangibility, 358–59
Integrated logistics systems
(ILS), 464–65
Integrated marketing communications (IMC), 494
assessing, 496
coordinating media, 495–96
definition of, 495
implementing, 496
Integrated multichannel
marketing systems, 433–35
Integration of communication
channels, 488
Integration of marketing concepts, 22, 23
Integrative growth, 43–44
Intensive distribution, 425
Intensive growth, 43
Interacting with customers,
141–42
Interactive marketing, 365, 478,
492, 540–45
advantages of, 540–41
communication options, 541
disadvantages of, 540–41
Interbrand valuation method,
257–58
Intercept interviews, 109
Interest, in consumer-adoption
process, 589
Intermediaries in market
channels, 416
dependence on
manufacturer, 436
numbers of, 424–25
types of, 424
Internal branding, 253
Internal engineering
assessment, 199
Internal environment analysis,
49–50
Internal marketing, 365, 623–29
creative, building, 628–29
organizing marketing
department, 623–27
relationships with other
departments, 627
Internal records, 70–71
databases, 71
data mining, 71
data warehousing, 71
order-to-payment cycle, 70
sales information
systems, 70

International division, 616
Internationalization
process, 597
International subsidiaries, 616
Internet
buzz marketing, 220
Central Contractor
Registration database, 207
e-procurement, 197–98
improving business
performance with, 204–5
in marketing research, 98
online business buying, 197
online purchasing by
government markets, 207
shift in buying patterns
caused by, 235
supplier search, 196–97
Interstitials, 543
Intertype competition,
growth of, 452
Intervening factors in purchase
decision, 170–71
Interviewing, 108–9
Intimacy in emotional
branding, 291
Intrinsic rewards, 558
Introduction stage of product life
cycle, 310, 312–13
Inventor, 312
Inventory, 467–68
Inventory-carrying costs, 467
Investment in economic
downturn, increasing, 318
Invitation, 491
Irregular demand, 8
Irritation in direct
marketing, 540
Item, 336
Jobbers, 421
Job-shop specialist, 309
Joint memberships, 437
Joint-venture co-branding, 344
Joint ventures, 605
Justifying, 622
Just-noticeable difference, 341
Knowledge, 245
Labeling, 348–49
Laddering, 107, 160
Laggards, 589
Late entry, 588
Late majority, 589
Latent demand, 8
Lateral marketing, 578
Lead generation, 198
Lead time, 523
Lean manufacturing, 465
“Learn-feel-do” sequence,
480–81
Learning, 163
Learning curve, 393
Legal behavior, 630

Legal issues
in advertising campaign, 510
in channel conflict, 438
Legal recourse, 438
Legitimate power, 428
Leisure-time activities, 79
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT), 225
Levels of production, 393
Leveraging secondary
associations, 252–53
in building brand equity,
252–53
in small business, 294
Lexicographic heuristic, 170
Licensed product, 261
Licensing, 604–5
Life-cycle cost, 376
Life cycle stage
in demographic segmentation,
216–17
personal factors influencing
consumer behavior,
155–56
Life stage in demographic
segmentation, 217
Lifestyle
definition of, 157
values and, 157–59
Likability, 485
Limited-service retailer, 448
Limited-service wholesalers, 462
Line extension, 260–61
Line-extension trap, 265
Line featuring, 341
Line filling, 341
Line modernization, 341
Line pruning, 342
Line stretching, 339–40
down-market stretch, 340
two-way stretch, 340
up-market stretch, 340
Listening, service quality
and, 372
Lobbying, 527
Location as retail channel,
458–59
Location pricing, 406
Logical resistance, 561
Logistic alliances, 51
Long tail theory, 235
Long-term memory (LTM), 163
Loss-leader pricing, 405
Lot size, 422
Lovemarks, 291
Low-end entry level, 263
Lower-volume retailers, 456
Low-interest financing, 405
Low-involvement consumer
decision making, 173–74
Low-markup retailers, 456
Low-quality trap, 408
Loyalty, 127
See also Customer loyalty
Luxury brands, 334–35

Macroenvironment analysis,
74–84
demographic environment,
75–77
economic environment, 77–78
major forces, identifying, 74
natural environment, 80–81, 82
of needs, 74
political-legal environment, 84
sociocultural environment,
78–80
technological environment,
81, 83–84
of trends, 74
Macroenvironment forces, 47
Macromodel of marketing
communication processes,
480
Macroscheduling decision, 517
Mail contacts, 108
Mail questionnaires, 108
Maintenance and repair, 328, 331
Major account manager
(MAM), 555
Major forces, identifying, 74
Major service offering, 357
Make or buy new-product
options, 567–68
Makers, 227
Management contracts, 604
Management services, 463
Manages by objectives (MBO), 50
Manufactured materials and
parts, 328
Manufacturer promotions, 520
Manufacturer-sponsored retailer
franchise, 433
Manufacturer-sponsored
wholesaler franchise, 433
Manufacturing sector, 356
Mapping in channel
management, 432
Market, 8
broadening, 303
business vs. consumer, in
organizational buying,
183–85
definitions, 39, 40, 85
demassification, 536
diversification, 304
evolution, 317
followers, 299, 305
forecast, 87
information, 462
makers, 439
minimum, 86
modification, 314
multiplier, 256
partitioning, 168
pioneer, 312
potential, 86, 87
profile, 338
shares, 86, 90
specialization, 234
See also specific market types

Market-buildup method, 88–89
Market-centered
organization, 627
Market-challengers, 299, 305
Market-challenger strategies,
305–7
general attack strategy,
choosing, 306
specific attack strategy,
choosing, 306
strategic objective and
opponent(s), 305–6
Market demand, 85–91
current, estimating, 88–90
expanding total, 301–2
functions, 86–87
future, estimating, 90–91
more usage, 301–2
new customers, 301
See also Demand
measurement
Market-driving firms, 302
Marketer
anticipative, 302
creative, 302
definition of, 7–8
entities marketed by, 5–7
frequently asked questions, 26
holistic, 36
master, 36, 37
opportunities spotted by, 48
Market-follower strategies, 307
Marketing
action, in marketing plan,
55–56
alliances, 51–52
audit, 643, 644–45
control, 641
controller, 642
customer value and, 10, 33–37
dashboards, 116–18
environment audit, 644
excellence, 365–66
excellence review, 643, 646
function audit, 645
funnel, 140, 228, 229
future of, 643, 646
implementation, 28, 640–41
insights, 26–27, 98
intermediaries, 327
management, 5, 25
metrics, 114–16, 642
mix, 25 (See also Four Ps)
network, 20
organizational audit, 644–45
partner expertise, 98–99
personalizing, 135–37
planning process, 15–16
practices, trends in, 621–23
productivity audit, 645
program modification, 314
research firms, 99
sensitivity of demand, 86
strategy, 54
strategy audit, 644

system, simple, 8–9
systems audit, 645
weaknesses, 647
See also Marketing concepts
Marketing activities
impact of, 402
market share expansion and,
304
Marketing channels, 415–45
channel conflict, 435–38
channel-design decisions,
422–27
channel integration and
systems, 431–35
channel-management
decisions, 427–31
definition of, 415
e-commerce marketing
practices, 438–41
hybrid, 416–17
importance of, 416
intermediaries in, 416, 424–25
m-commerce marketing
practices, 441–42
multichannel, 416–17
role of, 418–22
service outputs, 422–23
system, 416
value networks, 417–18
Marketing communication,
476–500
changing environment of,
476–77
effective, developing, 482–90
marketing communications
effects, 479
mix, 490–94
See also Integrated marketing
communications (IMC)
Marketing communication
process models, 480
macromodel, 480
micromodel of consumer
responses, 480–82
response hierarchy, 480–82
Marketing communications
budget, establishing,
488–90
affordable method, 489
communication budget
trade-offs, 490
competitive-parity method,
489
objective-and-task method,
489–90
percentage-of-sale method,
489
Marketing communications
mix, 490–94
characteristics of, 490–92
communication results,
measuring, 494
modes of communication in,
478–79
setting, factors in, 492–93
Index

I23

Marketing concepts
brands, 10
competition, 11
core, 9–12
definition of, 18
demands, 10
holistic, 18–19
integrated marketing, 20–21
internal marketing, 21
marketing channels, 11
marketing environment, 11
needs, 9–10
offerings, 10
performance marketing, 22, 24
positioning, 10
product, 18
production, 18
relationship marketing, 20
right and wrong, 19
satisfaction, 10
segmentation, 10
selling, 18
supply chain, 11
target markets, 10
value, 10
wants, 9–10
See also Marketing
Marketing decision support
system (MDSS), 112
Marketing in economic
downturn, 318
brand and product offerings,
fine-tuning, 320
budget allocations, reviewing,
319
customers, getting closer to,
318–19
increasing investment,
exploring upside of, 318
value proposition, compelling,
319–20
Marketing information system
(MIS)
components of, 67
definition of, 69
internal records in, 70–71
macroenvironment analysis
and, 74–84
marketing intelligence system
and, 71–74
Marketing innovation, 45–47
in corporate and division
strategic planning, 45–47
dimensions of, 46–47
Marketing in practice, 15–17
CMOs, 17
in organization, 17
planning process, 15–16
Marketing intelligence, 71–74
acting on, 73–74
collecting, on Internet, 72–73
communicating, 73–74
improving quantity and quality
of, 72
system, 71–73
I24

Index

Marketing management tasks,
26–28
building strong brands, 27
capturing marketing insights,
26–27
communicating value, 27
connecting with
customers, 27
creating successful long-term
growth, 27
delivering value, 27
implementing marketing
plan, 28
shaping market offerings, 27
strategies and plans,
developing, 26
Marketing-mix modeling, 116
Marketing-mix strategy, 231
Marketing opportunity
definition of, 48
evaluating, 49
spotted by marketers, 48
See also SWOT analysis
Marketing plan
components of, 54–55
criteria, 55
definition of, 36, 54
developing, 26
implementing, 28
marketing action and, 55–56
relationships in, role of, 55
research in, role of, 55
tactical, 37
See also Strategic marketing
plan
Marketing public relations
(MPR), 527–30
decisions in, 528
effectiveness of, measuring,
529–30
messages and vehicles,
choosing, 528–29
objectives, establishing, 528
tools in, 529
vehicles, 528–29
Marketing research
approaches, 101–3
causal, 100
communication-effect, 518
conducting, 97–121
definition of, 98
descriptive, 100
exploratory, 100
focus group research, 101–2
good, characteristics of, 113
instruments, 104–7
in marketing plan, 55
market productivity and,
measuring, 114–18
observational research, 101
pretest, in advertising
campaign, 518
process, 99–114
qualitative measures, 104,
106–7

questionnaires, 104, 105
sales-effect, 518–19
in small businesses, 293
in small companies, 98–99
specific, 100
survey research, 103
system, 97–99
technological devices, 107
Marketing research plan, developing, 100–110
behavioral research, 103
contact methods, 107–10
data sources, 100
experimental research, 103–4
research approaches, 101–3
research instruments, 104–7
sampling plan, 107
Marketing research process,
99–114
analyzing information, 100
barriers to use of,
overcoming, 112, 113
collecting information, 110–11
decision alternatives, 99–100
defining the problem, 99
developing research plan,
100–110
make decisions, 111, 112
objectives, 100
present findings, 111
Marketing resource management (MRM) software,
640, 641
Market leaders, 299
Market leader strategies,
299–305
expanding total market
demand, 301–2
increasing market share,
304–5
against price discounter,
300–301
protecting market share,
302–4
Market logistics, 464–69
decisions, 466–69
definition of, 464
integrated logistics systems,
464–65
inventory, 467–68
objectives, 465–66
order processing, 466–67
organizational lessons, 469
transportation, 468–69
warehousing, 467
Market-management organization, 627
Market-nichers, 299
Market-nicher strategies,
308–10
Market offerings, new, 567–93
consumer-adoption process,
589–90
new-product development,
568–70

new-product options, 567–68
organizational arrangements,
570–73
See also New-product
development
Market offerings, shaping, 27
Market opportunity analysis
(MOA), 49
Market-penetration index, 86
Market-penetration pricing,
389–90
Market penetration strategy, 301
Market-penetration strategy, 43
Marketplaces, 9, 17–24
Market productivity, measuring,
114–18
marketing dashboards,
116–18
marketing metrics, 114–16
marketing-mix modeling, 116
Market segmentation, 10,
213–31
behavioral, 227–29
brand valuation, 257
demographic, 216–25, 230
geographic, 214–16
levels of, 233
psychographic, 225–27
variables, 215, 230–31
See also Market targeting
Market-sensing process, 34
Market share, 291
budget decisions and, 505
increasing, 304–5
maximum, 389–90
protecting, 302–4
Market-skimming pricing, 390
Marketspaces, 9
Market targeting, 231–36
criteria, 231–32
ethical choice of market
targets, 235–36
evaluating and selecting
market segments, 232–36
full market coverage, 232–33
individual marketing, 234–35
multiple segment
specialization, 234
single-segment concentration,
234
steps in, 231–32
threats, 232
Market testing, 585–88
business-goods testing,
587–88
consumer-goods market
testing, 586–87
Market-test method, 91
Markup pricing, 396–97
Masculine dimension, 607
Maslow’s theory, 160–61
Mass communication channels,
487–88
Mass customization, 328
Mass marketing, 233

Master brand, 260
Master franchisees, 430
Materials and parts, 327–28
Matrix-management
organization, 627
Maturity stage of product life
cycle, 310, 313–14
marketing program
modification, 314
market modification, 314
product modification, 314
Mavens, 551
Maximum current profit, 389
Maximum market share, 389–90
Maximum market skimming, 390
M-commerce marketing
practices, 441–42
Measurable segments, 231
Media
allocation, 518
coordination, 495–96
for direct marketing, 539–40
earned, 546
free, 546
identity, 529
timing, 517–18
types, profiles of, 513
vehicles, 516–17
Media Movers, 545
Media selection, 510–19
advertising effectiveness,
evaluating, 518–19
alternate advertising options,
512–16
choosing among major media
types, 512
media allocation, 518
media timing, 517–18
media types, profiles of, 513
media vehicles, selecting
specific, 516–17
reach, frequency, and impact,
511–12
Mediation, 437–38
Megatrend, 74
Membership groups, 153
Memory, 163–66
encoding, 165
processes, 165–66
retrieval, 165, 166
Mental accounting, 176–77
Merchandise managers, 455
Merchandising conglomerate,
450
Merchants, definition of, 416
Merchant wholesalers, 462
MERCOSUR, 602
Merging, 622
Message
generation in advertising
campaign, 506–7
in marketing public relations,
528–29
source, 485–86
strategy, 484

Metamarkets, 9
Metamediaries, 9
Microenvironment forces, 47
Micromodel of consumer
responses, 480–82
Microscheduling decision, 517
Microsites, 542
Middle-market retailers, decline
of, 452
Millenials (Gen Y), 219–21, 635
Mind mapping, 578
Mind share, 291
Missionary, 553
Mission statements, 38–39
Mixed bundling, 344
Mobile commerce
(m-commerce), 441–42
Mobile defense, 303–4
Mobile marketing, 543–45
Mobile Newbies, 545
Models of brand equity
BrandAsset® Valuator, 245–46
brand resonance, 246,
248–49
BrandZ, 246
Modified rebuy, 186
Money-constrained
consumers, 158
Monitoring, 622
Monitoring systems, 367–68
Morphological analysis, 577
Most valuable customers
(MVCs), 137
Motivating sales representatives, 558–59
intrinsic vs. extrinsic
rewards, 558
sales quotas, 558–59
Motivation, 160–61
Freud’s theory, 160
Herzberg’s theory, 161
Maslow’s theory, 160–61
Motive, definition of, 160
MRO goods, 328
Multichannel conflict, 435–36
Multichannel marketing, 416–17
integrated systems, 433–35
Multicultural marketing
African Americans, 224
Asian Americans, 224–25
Hispanic Americans, 222–24
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT), 225
Multilevel in-depth selling, 193
Multilevel selling, 449
Multiple bases, 229
Multiple-factor index method,
89–90
Multiple frames of reference,
282–83
Multiple niching, 309
Multiple segment
specialization, 234
Multiple-sponsor
co-branding, 344

Multiple-stage campaigns, 495
Multiple-vehicle campaigns, 495
Multitasking, 158
Mutual services and
responsibilities, 426
Mystery in emotional
branding, 291
NAFTA, 602
Naked solution, 231
Narrative branding, 292
Nation-dominant hierarchy, 168
Natural environment, 80–81, 82
Natural products, 327
Nature, views of, 79
Near-zero inventory, 468
Need
in behavioral segmentation,
227
family, 336
general need description, 196
level, 580
macroenvironment, 74
met by service offerings, 357
as motives, 160
Need-payoff questions, 560
Needs-based segmentation, 231
Negative demand, 8
Net price analysis, 405
Network information
technology, 12
Network marketing, 449
Neuromarketing, 108
New contexts, 578
New entrants, threat of, 232
New-market segment
strategy, 301
New-offering realization
process, 34
New-product department, 572
New-product development,
567–93
business analysis, 583
commercialization, 588
concept to strategy, 579–84
customer tests, 585
development, 585–88
failures, 570
ideas, 573–79
innovation imperative, 568–69
market testing, 585–88
organizational arrangements,
570–73
physical prototypes, 585
process, 573–88
successes, 569–70
New-product failure, 570
New product launch, 527
New-product managers, 572
New-product options, 567–68
make or buy, 567–68
types of new products, 568
New-product success,
569–70
News, 529

New-task buying situations, 186
New technology, 204–5
Niche marketing, 234
Niche specialist roles, 309
Noise, 480
Noncompensatory models of
consumer choice, 170
Nondurable goods, 327
Nonexistent demand, 8
Nonexpansible market, 86
Nonpeak demand, 361
Nonpersonal communication
channels, 487–88
Nonprofit markets, 9
Nonprofit pricing objectives, 390
Nonstore retailing, 449
Nonsurviving pioneers, 313
North American Industry
Classification System
(NAICS), 88–89
Objective-and-task method,
489–90
Objectives of service
offerings, 357
Observational research, 101
Occasion segmentation, 228
Occupation, influence on
consumption patterns, 156
Offices of manufacturers/
retailers, 462
Office staff, 554
Off-invoice, 521
Off-list, 521
Off-price retailer, 449
Offset, 404
Offshoring, 78
Off the Network, 545
On-air tests, 518
One-level channel, 421
One-to-one marketing, 137
Online business buying, 197
Online buzz marketing, 220
Online communities and forums,
546–47
Online contacts, 109–10
Online travel agents, 370
Operating segmentation
variables, 230
Operating supplies, 328
Opinion leader, 153, 551
Opportunism in business
relationships, 203–4
Opportunity and threat analysis,
48–49
Opportunity space, 574
Optimal market share, 304
Optimism bias, 176
Optional-feature pricing,
342–43
Ordering ease, 331
Order processing, 466–67
Order-processing costs, 467
Order quantity, optimal,
467–68
Index

I25

Order/reorder point, 467
Order-routine specification, 201
Order taker, 553
Order-to-payment cycle, 70,
466–67
Organic growth, 567
Organic products, 633
Organization, 6
components of, 45
in corporate and division
strategic planning, 45
marketing in, 17
views of, 78–79
Organizational buying, 183–88
business market vs. consumer
market, 183–85
buying situations, 185–87
systems buying, 187
systems selling, 187–88
Organizational culture
in corporate and division
strategic planning, 45
Organizing internal marketing
department, 623–27
functional organization,
623, 625
geographic organization, 625
market-management
organization, 627
matrix-management
organization, 627
product- or brand-management organization, 625–27
Organizing new-product
development, 570–73
budgeting for new-product
development, 571–72
cross-functional teams, 572
decision process, 573
organizing new-product
development, 572–73
stage-gate systems,
572–73
Orphan brands, 316
Others
self-concept, 157
views of, 78
Outbound telemarketing, 539
Out-of-home advertising. See
Place advertising
Out-of-pocket costs, 376
Outsourcing, 622
Overdemand, 408
Overfull demand, 8
Overhead, 393
Overseas sales branch or
subsidiary, 604
Overwhelmed segment, 227
Ownership of service
offerings, 357
Packaging, 346–48
color wheel of, 347
as marketing tool, 346
objectives, 347
I26

Index

structural design of, 348
testing, 348
Paid search, 542
Parallel entry, 588
Parent brand, 260
Partial cost recovery, 390
Participants in business buying
process, 188–93
buying center, 188–89
buying center influences,
189–90
targeting firms, 191–92
targeting within business
center, 192–93
Partner relationship
management (PRM), 52
Part-time employees, 361
Past-sales analysis, 91
Patronage awards, 521
Payment equity, 375
Payment terms, longer, 405
Pay-per-click ads, 542
Peak-time efficiency, 361
Penetrated market, 85
People, in new four Ps, 25
People-based services, 357
Perceived risk, 171
Perceived services, 373
Perceived value, 580
Perceived-value pricing, 398–99
Percentage-of-sale method, 489
Perception, 161–62
differences in, 436
selective attention, 162
selective distortion, 162
selective retention, 162
subliminal, 162
Perceptual maps, 283–84
Performance
in new four Ps, 26
quality, 131, 329
review, 201
Performance marketing, 22, 24
financial accountability, 22
social responsibility
marketing, 22, 23
Periodic audit, 643
Peripheral cues, 173
Peripheral route, 173
Perishability, 361
Permission marketing, 136–37
Personal characteristics in
segmentation, 230
Personal communications
channels, 486–87
Personal contacts, 109
Personal factors influencing
consumer behavior, 155–59
age and stage in life cycle,
155–56
lifestyle and values, 157–59
occupation and economic
circumstances, 156
personality and self-concept,
156–57

Personal influence, 590
Personal information sources, 167
Personal interaction, 492
Personal interviewing, 109
Personality
definition of, 156
influencing consumer
behavior, 156–57
Personalizing marketing, 135–37
Personal selling, 560–62
in consumer-goods
marketing, 493
definition of, 478
qualities, 492
relationship marketing, 562
six steps in, 561–62
Personal word-of-mouth
marketing, 492
Personas, 112
Persons, marketing through, 6
Persuasive advertising, 505
Pervasiveness, 490
Physical attractiveness, 542
Physical evidence, 358
Physical risk, 171
Piggyback, 468
Pioneer advantage in product
life cycle, 312–13
Place, in old four Ps, 25
Place advertising, 512–15
billboards, 512–13
point of purchase, 514–15
product placement, 514
public spaces, 513–14
Place marketing, 6
Planned contraction, 304
Podcasts, 204, 205, 543
Point-of-purchase (P-O-P)
definition of, 514–15
displays and demonstration,
521
Points-of-difference (PODs),
280–85
brand mantras, 284–85, 286
category membership, 287–88
choosing, 283–84
communicating, 288–89
criteria, 280
definition of, 280
multiple frames of reference,
282–83
straddle positioning, 283
vs. points-of-parity, 281–82
Points-of-parity (POPs), 280–85
brand mantras, 284–85, 286
category, 280–81
choosing, 283–84
communicating, 288–89
competitive, 281
definition of, 280
multiple frames of reference,
282–83
straddle positioning, 283
vs. points-of-difference,
281–82

Political-legal environment, 84
business legislation, increase
in, 84
special interest groups,
growth of, 84
Pooling of individual
estimates, 91
Population age mix, 75, 76
Population growth,
worldwide, 75
Porter’s generic strategies, 51
Position defense, 303
Positioning, definition of, 276
See also Brand positioning
Positioning statement, 506
Positivity illusion, 176
Postpurchase
actions, 172
behavior, 172–73
satisfaction, 172
services, 457
uses and disposal, 172–73
Postsale service strategy, 377
customer-service evolution,
377–78
customer-service imperative,
378
Potential market, 85
Potential product, 326
Power distance, high vs. low, 607
Power grid, 245, 247
Preemptive cannibalization, 265
Preemptive defense, 303
Premiums, 521
Prepurchase services, 457
Presentation, service quality
and, 358
Press relations, 527
Price
allowances, 404–5
changes by competitors,
409–10
cuts, initiating, 407–8
cutting traps, 408
discounts, 404–5
discrimination, 406, 407
elasticity of demand, 392
endings, 388
escalation, 611–12
experiments, 392
impact on other parties, 403
indifference band, 392
in old four Ps, 25
packs, 521
policy, 426
pressures in supplier
selection, 199–200
as retail channel, 456–57
sensitivity, 390–91
Price, adapting, 403–7
differentiated pricing, 406–7
geographical pricing, 404
price allowances, 404–5
price discounts, 404–5
promotional pricing, 405

Price, selecting final, 402–3
company pricing policies,
402–3
gain-and-risk-sharing
pricing, 403
impact of other marketing
activities, 402
impact of price on other
parties, 403
Price increases
avoiding, approaches for, 409
competitors, responding to,
409–10
initiating, 408–9
markup pricing, 396–97
profits before and after, 408
stealth, 403
Price-off, 521
Price-quality inferences, 388
Price setting, 389–403
analyzing competitor’s costs,
prices, and offers, 395
determining demand, 390–92
estimating costs, 392–95
pricing objective, selecting,
389–90
selecting final price, 402–3
selecting pricing method,
395–402
summary of steps in, 389
Price/value customers, 422
Price-war trap, 408
Pricing
adapting the price, 403–7
competitor’s price changes,
responding to, 409–10
consumer psychology and
pricing, 386–88
methods of pricing, 386
price cuts, initiating, 407–8
price increases, initiating,
408–9
pricing environment,
changing, 384–86
setting the price, 389–403
understanding, 383–88
See also Global pricing
strategies
Pricing collaborations, 51
Pricing method, selecting,
395–402
auction-type pricing, 401–2
going-rate pricing, 401
markup pricing, 396–97
perceived-value pricing,
398–99
target-return pricing, 397–98
value pricing, 399–401
Pricing objective, selecting,
389–90
maximum current profit, 389
maximum market share,
389–90
maximum market skimming,
390

nonprofit and public
organization objectives, 390
product-quality leadership, 390
survival, 389
Primal branding, 292
Primary activities in value
chain, 34
Primary data, 100
Primary demand, 86
Primary groups, 153
Primary packaging, 346
Primary service options, 368–69
Primary service package, 369
Prime contractors, 187
Principle of congruity, 486
Print ads, 507–9, 518
Privacy, 84, 376, 540
Private aviation, 370
Private carrier, 468
Private exchanges, 197
Private label brand,
definition of, 459
Private labels, 459–61
role of, 460
success factors, 460
threat, manufacturer’s
response to, 461
top 10, of 2009, 459
Private nonprofit sector, 356
Privatization, 12
Prizes, 521
PRIZM clusters, 215–16
Proactive marketing, 302–3
Problem detection method, 47
Problem questions, 560
Problem recognition, 167, 196
Process
in customer perceived
value, 126
elements in, 480
models, 480
in new four Ps, 25
Procurement
process, 193–95
as retail channel, 455–56
Product, 5
adaptation, 608–9
alliances, 51
category interest, 527
characteristics, 325–27
class, 336
companies, service strategies
for, 377
definition of, 325
definitions, 39, 40
encountering public
problems, 528
family, 336
in four Ps, 25
hierarchy, 336
imitation, 307
innovation, 307
invention, 609
manager, 572, 626
map, 338

modification, 314
offerings, fine-tuning, 320
pioneer, 312
placement, 514
planning, marketing plan and,
54–55
product-line specialist, 309
publicity, 527
quality, 131–32
specialization, 234
specification, 196
substitutability, budget
decisions and, 505
systems and mixes, 336–37
teams, 626
variant, 336
variety, 423
warranties, 521
Product assortment
must-haves, 455
as retail channel, 454–55
Product-bundling pricing, 344
Product classifications, 327–28
consumer-goods
classification, 327
durability, 327
industrial-goods classification,
327–28
tangibility, 327
Product-development
strategy, 43
Product differentiation, 329–30
conformance quality, 329–30
customization, 329
durability, 330
features, 329
form, 329
performance quality, 329
reliability, 330
repairability, 330
style, 330
Product-feature specialist, 309
Product-form pricing, 406
Production
accumulated, in estimating
costs, 393–94
concepts, 18
levels of, in estimating
costs, 393
Productivity of sales
representatives, 557–58
prospect call, norms for, 557
sales technology, 558
sales time, efficient use of,
557–58
Product life cycle (PLC)
budget decisions and, 505
critique of, 317
curves, 310–11
decline stage, 314–16
evidence for, 316–17
growth stage, 313
introduction stage, 312–13
market evolution, 317
marketing strategies, 310–18

maturity stage, 313–14
pioneer advantage, 312–13
stage, 493
style, fashion, and fad life
cycles, 311
summary of, 317
Product line, 336
analysis, 337–39
market profile, 338
pricing, 342
sales and profits, 337–38
Product-line length, 339–42
line featuring, 341
line filling, 341
line modernization, 341
line pruning, 342
line stretching, 339–40
Product-management
organization, 625–27
Product-market type, 492–93
Product mix
definition of, 336
dimensions, 336–37
Product-mix pricing, 342–44
by-product pricing, 343–44
captive-product pricing, 343
optional-feature pricing,
342–43
product-bundling pricing, 344
product-line pricing, 342
two-part pricing, 343
Product-penetration
percentage, 87
Product-positioning map, 580
Product-quality leadership, 390
Product strategy, 325–53
co-branding, 344–45
design, 332–33
ingredient branding, 345–46
labeling, 348–49
packaging, 346–48
product characteristics, 325–27
product classifications,
327–28
product differentiation,
329–30
product hierarchy, 336
product-line analysis, 337–39
product-line length, 339–42
product-mix pricing, 342–44
product systems and mixes,
336–37
services differentiation,
330–32
warranties and
guarantees, 349
Product-support services,
375–78
customer needs, identifying
and satisfying, 376–77
e-service quality,
assessing, 376
postsale service strategy, 377
service strategies for product
companies, 377
Index

I27

Product value analysis
(PVA), 196
Professional purchasing, 185
Profitability control, 641, 642
Profits, maximum current, 389
Profits and sales, 337–38
Profittiers, 366–67
Program
formulation, 53
implementation, 53
multiplier, 255, 256
in new four Ps, 25
Projective techniques,
106, 160
Promoting, wholesale, 462
Promotion, 523
in old four Ps, 25
Promotional alliances, 51
Promotional pricing, 405
Promotion cost, marketing
public relations and, 528
Promotion tools
business, 522
consumer, 520, 521
marketing public
relations, 529
sales force, 522, 523
trade, 520, 521–22
Properties, 6
Proposal solicitation, 198
Prospect call, norms for, 557
Prospecting, 554
Prospect theory, 177
Protecting market share, 302–4
defensive marketing, 303–4
proactive marketing,
302–3
Psychic proximity, 602
Psychogenic needs, 160
Psychographics, 225
Psychographic segmentation,
225–27
Psychological discounting, 405
Psychological life-cycle
stages, 155
Psychological processes, key,
160–66
emotions, 163
learning, 163
memory, 163–66
motivation, 160–61
perception, 161–62
Psychological repositioning, 170
Psychological resistance, 561
Psychological risk, 171
Public
definition of, 527
direct marketing
issues, 539
information sources, 167
Publications, 529
Publicity, 478, 491, 527
Public organization pricing
objectives, 390
Public relations, 478, 491
I28

Index

Public relations (PR)
definition of, 527
functions of PR
department, 527
See also Marketing public
relations (MPR)
Public service activities, 529
Public spaces, 513–14
Pull strategy, 416
Pulsing, new product advertising
and, 517
Purchase decision, 170–71
intervening factors, 170–71
noncompensatory models of
consumer choice, 170
Purchase intention, 581
Purchase occasions, 581
Purchase probability scale, 91
Purchasing
approaches in segmentation,
230
frequency, 581
process, 193–95
professional, 185
upgrading of, 194
Pure bundling, 344
Pure-click companies, 439–40
business-to-business
e-commerce, 439–40
e-commerce success factors,
439
“Pure Play” auction sites, 196–97
Pure service offering, 357
Pure tangible good, 356
Push strategy, 416
Qualified available market, 85
Qualitative measures, 104,
106–7
brand personification, 107
laddering, 107
projective techniques, 106
pros and cons of, 104
visualization, 106
word associations, 106
Quality
control, 360
credence, 357
customer expectations,
managing, 373–75
determinants of, 374
e-service, 376
functional, 365
gaps in, 373–74
impact of, 131–32
improvement, 314, 372
managing, 370–75
marketing excellence,
achieving, 365–66
marketing tools for, 358
market share expansion
and, 304
measuring dimensions of
service, 371, 372
of product, 131–32

self-service technologies,
incorporating, 375
of service, 131–32
service-quality model,
373–74
standards of, 366
total, marketing and, 132
Quality function deployment
(QFD), 585
Quality-price specialist, 309
Questionnaires, 104, 105
dos and don’ts, 104, 105
mail, 108
online, 109
types of questions in, 105
Quick response systems
(QRS), 331
Race in demographic
segmentation, 222–25
African Americans, 224
Asian Americans, 224–25
Hispanic Americans, 222–24
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT), 225
Racial diversity, 76–77
Radio ads, 509
Radio frequency identification
(RFID) systems, 455
Rapid phototyping, 580
Raw-material-exporting
economies, 78
Raw materials, 327–28
Reach, media selection and,
511–12
Reactive response, 302
Real positioning, 170
Rebates, 521
Receiver in communication
process, 480
Recovery, service quality
and, 372
Recruiting/selecting sales
representatives, 556–57
Red-ocean thinking, 278
Reduced-price pack, 521
Reduction of discounts, 408
Reengineering, 622
Reference groups influencing
consumer behavior,
153–54
Reference prices, 387–88
Referent power, 428
Regional product version, 609
Regional shopping
centers, 459
Regional trade areas and
agreements, 602
Reinforcement advertising, 505
Relationship marketing in
personal selling, 562
Relationships
business partner, 202
buyer-supplier, 202–3
in marketing plan, 55

supplier-customer, 184
See also Business-to-business
customer relationships
Relationship-specific
adaptations, 203
Relative advantage, 590
Relevance, 245
Relevant events and
experiences, 492
Reliability, 330
online, 376
in service quality, 372, 374
in services differentiation, 290
Reminder advertising, 505
Repairability, 330
Repositioning mature
product, 527
Representativeness
heuristics, 175
Research. See Marketing
research
Research and development
(R&D) budgets, 84
Reservation systems, 361
Resilience in services
differentiation, 290
Resonance, 249
Response, 480
Response hierarchy model,
480–82
Response in personal selling, 492
Responsive anticipation, 302
Responsiveness, service quality
and, 372
Results data, 71
Retail co-branding, 344
Retailer
cooperative, 433, 450
corporate retailing, 450
definition of, 447
franchising, 450
nonstore retailing, 449
product version, 609
promotions, 520
store retailers, 448–49
types of, 448–50
Retail health clinics, 370
Retailing, 447–59
channels (See Retailing
channels)
innovative retail
organization, 448
marketing decisions, 453–54
new environment of, 451–53
vs. wholesaling, 461–62
Retailing channels, 454–59
communications, 458
location, 458–59
prices, 456–57
procurement, 455–56
product assortment, 454–55
services, 457
store activities and
experiences, 457–58
store atmosphere, 457

Retail sector, 356
Retail store, definition of, 447
Retail transformation, 12–13
Retention, 268
Return on investment (ROI), 50
Returns, 331–32
Reverse assumption
analysis, 577
Reverse auction, 13
Reverse-flow channels, 421
Reward power, 428
RFM formula, 71, 538
Rights, channel conflict and, 436
Risk
analysis, 54–55
bearing, 462
in business relationships,
203–4
gain sharing and, 200
Role
channel conflict and, 436
definition of, 154
Roving Nodes, 545
Running costs, 467
Russia’s developing markets,
598, 600
Sales
assistants, 558
budget, 87
calls, multiple, 185
channel, 418
contests, 523
information systems, 70
marketing exchange,
hypothetical, 554
metrics, 642
profits and, 337–38
quota, 87
quotas, 558–59
technology, 558
time, efficient use of, 557–58
volume, alternate ways to
increase, 315
Sales-effect research, 518–19
Sales force, 553–60
compensation, 556
contractual, 555
direct, 555
inside salespeople, 558
objectives and strategies,
554–55
opinions, composite of, 91
promotion, 519
promotion tools, 522, 523
size, 556
structure, 555
See also Sales
representatives
Salesmen, 551
Sales promotion, 478, 491,
519–24
business/sales force
promotion tools, selecting,
522, 523

consumer promotion tools,
selecting, 520
decisions in, 519
definition of, 519
objectives, 519, 520
program, 522–24
trade promotion tools,
selecting, 520, 521–22
vs. advertising, 519–20
Sales representatives,
556–60
evaluating, 559–60
motivating, 558–59
positions, 553
productivity of, 557–58
recruiting and selecting,
556–57
training and supervising, 557
See also Sales force
Sales-wave research, 586
Same-company co-branding,
344
Samples, 521
Sample size, 107
Sampling
plan, 107
procedure, 107
unit, 107
Satisfaction, definition of, 128
Satisfied sippers, 227
Satisfiers, 161
Savings, 78
Savvy shoppers, 227
Scalloped product life
cycle, 311
Scenario analysis, 45
Scientific method, 113
Sealed-bid auctions, 402
Search dynamics, 167–68
Search engine optimization, 542
Search options in interactive
marketing, 542
Secondary associations,
leveraging
in building brand equity,
252–53
in small business, 294
Secondary beliefs, 79
Secondary data, 100
Secondary groups, 153
Secondary packaging, 346
Secondary service options,
368–69
Second-mover advantage, 312
Second-tier contractors, 187
Security, online, 376
Segment acid test, 231
Segmentation. See Market
segmentation
Segmentation, targeting,
positioning (STP), 34
Segment attractiveness, 231
Segment identification, 231
Segment positioning, 231
Segment profitability, 231

Segment rivalry, threat of, 232
Selective attention, 162
Selective distortion, 162
Selective distribution, 425
Selective retention, 162
Selective specialization, 234
Self, views of, 78
Self-concept influencing
consumer behavior, 156–57
Self-liquidating premium, 521
Self-selection retailer, 448
Self-service retailer, 448
Self-service technologies
(SSTs), 375
Seller’s international marketing
headquarters, 613
Selling, 462, 554
Sell-in time, 523
Sender in communication
process, 480
Sensuality in emotional
branding, 291
Servant leadership, service
quality and, 372
Service, 355–81
alliances, 51
backup, 423
blueprint, 360
channel, 418
characteristics of, 358–61
complementary, 361
contracts, 377, 405
customer relationship, shifting, 362–65
definition of, 327, 356
delivery of, unsuccessful, 373
dependability, 376
design, service quality and,
372
differentiating, 368–70
dimensions, measuring,
371, 372
equipment-based, 357
expected, 373
facilitating, 377
government sector, 356
guarantees, 360
innovation with, 370
marketing, 5, 365
nature of, 355
offerings, 356–57
options, primary and
secondary, 368–70
people-based, 357
perceived, 373
product-support, 375–78
quality, managing, 370–75
quality of, 131–32
as retail channel, 457
sector channels, 421–22
shared, 361
specialist, 309
unsuccessful delivery of,
373–74
value-augmenting, 377

Service-firm-sponsored retailer
franchise, 433
Service/quality customers,
422
Service-quality model,
373–74
Services differentiation, 290,
330–32
customer consulting, 331
customer training, 331
delivery, 331
installation, 331
maintenance and repair, 331
ordering ease, 331
returns, 331–32
Services marketing, 365
best practices of top service
companies, 366–68
differentiating services,
368–70
excellence in, 365–66
types of, 365
Servicing, 554
SERVQUAL scale, 374
Setup costs, 467
Shallow-pockets trap, 408
Shared services, 361
Shareholder value, 42, 115, 140,
246, 255–56, 476
Share of advertising
expenditures, 519
Share of consumers’ minds and
hearts, 519
Share of market, 519
Share of voice, 519
Share of wallet, 141
Share-penetration index, 87
Shifting loyals, 228
Shill marketing, 551
Shipping packaging, 346
Shopper marketing,
growth of, 453
Shopping goods, 327
Shopping strips, 459
Short-term memory
(STM), 163
Silent Generation, 221–22
Simulated test marketing, 586
Single niching, 309
Single-segment
concentration, 234
Situational factors in
segmentation, 230
Situation analysis, 54
Situation questions, 560
Six steps in personal selling,
561–62
closing, 561–62
follow-up and maintenance,
562
overcoming objections, 561
preapproach, 561
presentation and
demonstration, 561
prospecting and qualifying, 561
Index

I29

Skepticism in marketing
research process, 113
Skunkworks, 572
Slotting fee, 460
Small businesses
brand positioning for, 293–94
definition of, 191
opportunities and challenges
of, 192
Social channels, 487
Social classes, 153
Social-cultural forecasts, 74
Social factors influencing
consumer behavior,
12–14, 153–55
family, 154
reference groups, 153–54
social roles and status, 154,
155
Social issues in advertising
campaign, 510
Socially responsible business
models, 634
Socially responsible marketing,
629–40
cause-related marketing,
634–38
corporate social responsibility,
630–34
firms of endearment, 630
socially responsible business
models, 634
social marketing, 638–40
Social marketing, 638–40
Social media, 546–49
Social media in word of mouth,
546–49
blogs, 547–48
online communities and
forums, 546–47
social networks, 548
using, 548–49
Social networks, 254, 255, 548
Social responsibility behavior,
630, 632–33
Social responsibility marketing,
22, 24
Social risk, 171
Social roles/status influencing
consumer behavior, 154, 155
Social stratification, 153
Society, views of, 79
Sociocultural environment, 78–80
core cultural values, 79
subcultures, existence of, 80
views, 78–79
Software of success, 53
Solution selling, 200
Solution vendor, 553
Sourcing strategy, 50
South Africa’s developing markets, 598, 601
Spatial convenience, 422–23
Special customer pricing, 405
Special event pricing, 405
I30

Index

Special interest groups, growth
of, 84
Specialist buyers, 455
Specialized wholesalers, 462
Specialty advertising, 523
Specialty goods, 327
Specialty-line marketing
research firms, 99
Specialty store, 449
Specific-customer specialist, 309
Specific investments, 203–4
Specific marketing research, 100
Speeches, 529
Spiral development process, 573
Split loyals, 228
Sponsorship
activities, 526
in marketing public relations,
529
programs, 525
Sponsorship decisions, 525–26
events, choosing, 525
sponsorship activities,
measuring, 526
sponsorship programs,
designing, 525
Sports marketing, 220
Spot markets, 197
Sprinkler approach, 598
Stage-gate systems, 572–73
Stakeholder-performance
scorecard, 116
Stand-alone stores, 459
Standardized marketing
program, 606
Standards of service quality, 366
Statistical analysis, 392
Statistical demand analysis, 91
Status, definition of, 154, 155
Stealth marketing, 551
Stealth price increases, 403
Stock-keeping unit, 336
Stockless purchase plans, 201
Storage warehouses, 467
Store activities/experiences as
retail channel, 457–58
Store atmosphere as retail
channel, 457
Store retailers, 448–49
Store within larger store, 459
Storytelling, 292
Straddle positioning, 283
Straight extension, 608
Straight rebuy, 185
Strategic alliances, 51–52
Strategic blueprint, 574
Strategic business units (SBUs)
characteristics of, 41
establishing, 39–42
resources assigned to, 42
Strategic concept, 366
Strategic control, 641, 643–46
marketing audit, 643, 644–45
marketing excellence review,
643, 646

Strategic formulation, 50–52
Porter’s generic strategies
and, 51
strategic alliances and,
51–52
Strategic group, 51
Strategic justification, 437
Strategic marketing plan
business unit, 47–54
corporate, 37–47
definition of, 36–37
division, 37–47
role of, in customer value,
36–37
Strategic objective and
opponent(s), 305–6
Strategic-planning gap, 42
Strategic withdrawal, 304
Strategy, definition of, 51
Street teams, 221
Strengths and weaknesses
analysis, 49–50, 52
Strivers, 227
Student ambassadors, 220
Style, 330
Style improvement, 314
Style life cycles, 311
Sub-brand, 260, 261
Subcultures
definition of, 153
existence of, 80
Subliminal perception, 162
Subsistence economies, 78
Substantial segments, 231
Substitute products, threat of,
232
SUCCESS, 165
Successive sets in consumer
decision making, 167–68
Supermarket, 449
Superordinate goals, 437
Supersegment, 234
Superstore, 449
Supervising sales representatives, 557
Supplier-customer relationship,
184
Supplier-evaluation model, 198
Supplier partnering, 622
Suppliers, number of, 200–201
Supplier search, 196–98
e-procurement, 197–98
lead generation, 198
Supplier selection, 198–201
number of suppliers, 200–201
price pressures, overcoming,
199–200
Supplies, 328
Supply chain, 35
Supply chain management
(SCM), 418, 464
Supply-side management, 428
Supply-side method, 526
Support activities in value
chain, 34

Surveys
of buyer intentions, 91
consumer, 523
direct questions, 199
estimating demand curves, 391
research, 103
Survival, 389
Survival-age distribution, 583
Survivors, 227
Sustainability, 633–34
Swag, 384–85
Sweepstakes, 521
Switchers, 228
SWOT analysis, 48–50
external environment analysis,
48–49
internal environment analysis,
49–50
See also Marketing opportunity
Syndicated-service research
firms, 99
Systematic audit, 643
Systems buying, 187
Systems contracting, 187
Systems selling, 187–88
Table of contents, 54
Tactical marketing plan, 37
Tangibility, 327
Tangible good
with accompanying
services, 356
pure, 356
service quality and, 372
Target audience, identifying, 482
Target costing, 394
Target groups, 527
Targeting, 554
behavioral, 146
within business center,
192–93
firms, 191–92
See also Market targeting
Target market
definition of, 10, 85
definitions, 39
direct mail, 538
Target-return pricing, 397–98
Teamwork, service quality
and, 372
Tech Indifferent, 545
Technical people, 554
support, 558
Technician, 553
Technology, 81, 83–84
change, accelerating
pace of, 83
innovation opportunities, 83
in marketing research, 107
R&D budgets, 84
regulation of technological
change, 84
in retailing, growing
investment, 452
strategy, 50

Telemarketers, 558
Telemarketing, 539
Telephone contacts, 108–9
Telephone interviewing, 108
Television ads, 507
Television direct-response
marketing, 449
Ten commandments of global
branding, 608
Territorial rights of
distributors’, 426
Testing elements in direct
mail, 539
Test markets, 587
Text messaging used in online
research, 110
Theater tests, 518
Thinkers, 226
Threats, 232
Three Cs model for price
setting, 395
Three-level channel, 421
“Three minutes” research
approach, 192
Tie-in promotions, 521
Time-and-duty analysis, 556
Time-constrained
consumers, 158
Timely word-of-mouth
marketing, 492
Time pricing, 406
Time risk, 171
Time-series analysis, 91
Today Show, The (television
show), 74
Top management, 554
Top-management
commitment, 366
Total cost of ownership
(TCO), 391
Total customer benefit, 125
Total customer cost, 125
Total market potential, 88
Total number of
exposures, 511
Total sales, estimating,
583–83
Total set, 167
Trade promotion, 519
tools, 520, 521–22
Trade shows, 523
Trading-up/down/over trend, 218
Traditionalist, 227
Trailer tests, 518

Training, 428
channel partnerships, 428
channel power, 428
procedures, 360
of sales representatives, 557
Trainship, 468
Transfer prices, 612
Transformational appeals,
484–85
Transportation, 462, 468–69
Traveling export sales
representatives, 604
Trends in macroenvironment, 74
Trials, 511, 521, 589
Trust, 203
Trustworthiness, 485
Two-level channel, 421
Two-part pricing, 343
Two-way stretch, 340
Tying agreements, 438
Unbundling, 408
Uncertainty avoidance, weak vs.
strong, 607
Uncertainty management, 302–3
Uncontrollable returns, 331
Undifferentiated marketing, 233
Unfairness in direct
marketing, 540
Unit metrics pathway, 117
Universe, views of, 79
Unsought goods, 327
Unwholesome demand, 8
Up-market stretch, 340
Up-selling, 141
Up-to-date marketing, 492
Usage
in behavioral segmentation,
228–29
more, in expanding total
market demand, 301–2
rate, 228
User
in behavioral segmentation,
228–29
in buying center, 188
decision roles, 227
status, 228
targets, 581
VALS segmentation, 226–27
Value, 10
campaigns, 638
communicating, 27

concepts, applying, 125–26
core, 159
core cultural, 79
creation, 36
delivery, 27, 36
delivery network, 35
delivery process, 33–34
delivery system, 127
exploration, 36
lifestyle and, 157–59
networks, 417–18
pricing, 399–401
proposition, 10, 127
See also Customer-perceived
value (CPV)
Value-adds vs. costs of different
channels, 426
Value-augmenting
services, 377
Value chain
customer value and, 34–35
partner, 203–4
Value proposition
customer-focused, 276
in economic downturn,
319–20
Variability, 359–60
Variable-amount
compensation, 556
Variable costs, 393
Variables in market
segmentation, 230–31
Variety-seeking buying
behavior, 174
Vendor-managed inventory
(VMI), 201
Venture teams, 572
Versatility, 496
Vertical coordination, benefits
of, 202–3
Vertical hubs, 197
Vertical-level specialist, 309
Vertical marketing systems
(VMS), 431–33
administered, 432
competition in retailing,
new, 433
contractual, 433
corporate, 432
Vertical markets, 196
Videos in marketing, 221
Views in sociocultural
environment, 78–79
Viral marketing, 549–50

Virtual reality, 580
Visualization, 106
Visual tests on packaging, 348
Voice of the customer (VOC)
measurements, 367
Voluntary chain, 450
Waiting and delivery
time, 422
Warehousing, 462, 467
Warranties, 349
extended, 377
product, 521
in promotional pricing, 405
Waterfall approach, 598
Webinar, 204, 205
Web sites
business-to-business
e-commerce, 439
design, 376, 542
interactive marketing
communications, 541–42
Weighted number of
exposures, 511
Wholesaler-sponsored voluntary
chain, 433
Wholesaling, 461–64
definition of, 461
functions of, 462–63
major wholesaler types, 462
trends in, 463–64
vs. retailing, 461–62
Win-backs, 143
With-pack premiums, 521
Word associations, 106
Word of mouth, 546–53
buzz marketing, 549–51, 552
effects, measuring, 552–53
in marketing communications
mix, 478, 492
opinion leaders, 551
social media, 546–49
viral marketing, 549–50
Workload approach, 556
World product groups, 616
Write-ups of activity
results, 559
Yield pricing, 406
Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation
Technique (ZMET), 106
Zero-level channel, 420
Zone of tolerance, 374

Index

I31

